
*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 74941 ***






GRITNY PEOPLE




                                  GRITNY
                                  PEOPLE

                             R. EMMET KENNEDY

                         _Design & Decoration by
                         Edward Larocque Tinker_

                              [Illustration]

                       DODD MEAD & COMPANY NEW YORK
                                   1927

                             COPYRIGHT, 1927
                     BY DODD, MEAD AND COMPANY, INC.

                           PRINTED IN U. S. A.

               MANUFACTURED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
            BY THE VAIL-BALLOU PRESS, INC., BINGHAMTON, N. Y.




    “_At night was come into that hostelrie_
    _Wel nyne and twenty in a companye,_
    _Of sondry folk, by adventure i-falle_
    _In felawschipe...._
    _Me thinketh it acordant to resoun,_
    _To telle yow alle the condicioun_
    _Of eche of hem, so as it seemed me,_
    _And which they weren, and of what degre._”

               —PROLOGUE TO CANTERBURY TALES.




HIST’RIES


    AUNT SUSAN SMILEY                  1

    TOM AND BELL                       5

    THE INTERPRISE                     9

    SCILLA                            11

    FELO AND NOOKIE                   16

    UNCLE FOTEEN                      23

    PLUNKUM                           28

    UNCLE NAT                         31

    ROVING ROXY                       34

    CARMELITE, SOONGY AND DINK        38

    DINK’S MUSIC                      47

    GUSSIE FISKY                      53

    MAGGIE HUTSON                     55

    LIZZIE AND CHESTER                61

    SCANDALIZIN’                      76

    LETHE AND AUNT AMY                81

    FELO’S WHITE FOLKS                88

    UPSETMENT                         91

    FELO AND LETHE                   106

    ’CROSS THE PASTURE               113

    TEMPE                            124

    SPERRET NOISES                   133

    SCILLA’S DISCOVERY               138

    CARMELITE AND AUNT FISKY         144

    DINK AT HOME                     156

    GUSSIE AND MR. HOOBLITZ          165

    CARMELITE’S RAFFLE               174

    THE SWITCH ENGINE                193

    NEWS FROM GRITNY                 201

    HOUSEKEEPING                     205

    GUSSIE’S WAKE                    216

    TO FURREN PARTS                  221

    BUZZUM FRIENDS                   237

[Illustration]




To be looked upon as a favored “member” of Aunt Susan Smiley’s cook shop,
all the requisites one need have were the ability to appreciate her gumbo
and sweet potato pies, coupled with a talent for telling a good story.

The gumbo and pies were not only a pride to Aunt Susan, but were things
of great marvel to the whole colored population the full length of the
river “coast.” Of course the pies were best when yams were in season. But
with a little “sweet milk” and a dash of vanilla extract, she was able
to work wonders with the commoner variety of sweet potato, and few of
her patrons knew the difference; unless they had some knowledge of truck
gardening and were “well-posted ’bout potato-time.”

Like all good cooks, Aunt Susan was careful not to reveal to her dusky
sisters the secret of her original recipes. And if any white person asked
her to tell how she prepared some of her dainty concoctions, she never
went beyond saying: “Honey, de firs’ thing you gotta have is a black
han’.”

The telling of stories was a thing Aunt Susan looked to with the
discrimination of a true judge of oral literature. Her patrons were free
to pass the whole night in her shop, sitting before the cheerful fire
on the hearth, provided they had a good story to tell or a good song
to sing, whatever the model might be; it being understood that pies and
gumbo were available for the growing appetite, and drip coffee could be
furnished when needed to soothe the husky throats of the indefatigable
singers. If the season happened to be summer, bountiful pitchers of
lemonade with raspberry syrup took the place of black coffee; and every
one could “lap up limonade an’ spread joy to a comfut.”

Alcoholic drinks were taboo. Not because Aunt Susan had any religious
scruples; for she frankly admitted she was “no licentage Chrishtun;” but
because she felt that “a nigger in licker ain’ no fittin’ comp’ny for
nobody decen’, Chrishtun or w’atsomeever.”

It mattered little if a “member” hadn’t any money. If he could tell an
interesting story, his credit was good until the end of the week, at
which time he was expected to pay. Failing in this, he was declared
“on-finanshul,” and was denied the privilege of the house until he
reinstated himself.

A black space on the side wall carried the various accounts marked up
in chalk; a stroke for each pie or plate of gumbo, in one column; and a
like marking for the drinks in another column. As each mark stood for a
nickel, it was an easy matter to reckon when the time came for settling
up.

Although unable to read, Aunt Susan’s manner of counting and making
change had the accuracy of a primitive Chinese abacus-Pythagoricus. On
the mantelshelf she kept a blue bowl half-filled with grains of corn.
If a dollar bill were given in settlement of an account, grains of corn
equalling the amount of the bill were counted out on the table. Then
the strokes on the wall were counted, and as many grains of corn were
taken from the whole; the remaining grains representing the change to be
returned. Fortunately, the patrons seldom presented her with anything
higher than a two dollar bill. However slow the process, the method was
sure; and even though she had to change a five dollar note now and then,
no one ever complained of wrong count.

Aunt Susan was a kindly, soft-voiced, full-bosomed woman, about sixty
years old. She had no family of her own; but living with her, as a
sort of charge, was a blind man named Tom Lakes, some twenty years her
junior. She had known Tom from his early childhood, and had always taken
a motherly interest in him; mending his clothes, cooking his meals, and
taking care of his money for him, long before he married and met with the
horrible accident which caused his blindness.

Tom married a young woman who came to the village a stranger,—“some wile
Georgia nigger out de wilderness,” as she was called by Tom’s friends,
few of whom had any regard for her because of her arrogance and “scawnful
ways.”

After his marriage, Tom continued to pay his daily visits to Aunt Susan;
helping her peel potatoes, clean crabs for the gumbo, chop wood, and
redden the floor with brick-dust; just as he had always done. These
little attentions awakened a feeling of resentment in the suspicious mind
of the scornful Georgia lady. Tom was kind to her and provided for every
humble need; but why must he go and do work for another woman?... And his
visits at night; going to take part in the singing and story-telling with
other people before Susan’s fireplace;—another thorn in her jealous soul.
Every invitation from Tom to go along with him, she refused; preferring
to remain at home, brooding and wondering. She was sure something more
than “ole lady” interest held Tom to Aunt Susan. No woman kept a man’s
money unless there was something secret between them,—and the man with a
“natchal wife of his own”.... “Who? Do I look like I got any green in my
eye, keep me from seein’ w’at direction de win’ blowin’ in?—Tom mus’ be
take me for a fool!”

So she mused to herself when he was away by day; brooding deeper on the
seeming deception when he was away at night revelling in the pleasant
flow of song and story and the wholesome regalement of crab gumbo and
sweet potato pie.




The night of July 4th was to be a “big interprise” at Aunt Susan’s. Three
“good altone songsters” were coming to lend added luster to the meeting,
and make the “buildin’ rock wid ole-time shoutin’ praise.” Aunt Susan was
over the stove the greater part of the day, making pies; and to give the
gumbo an extra flavor, Tom had gone crawfishing and brought home a basket
full of crawfish, which he would give as his donation. Bell told him she
would boil them and pick them, a wifely condescension which pleased Tom
as much as it caused him to wonder.

“Maybe her min’ done change at las’. An’ maybe she’ll go ’long wid me
tonight to Sis’ Susan house,” thought Tom, as he dragged a chair out on
the front gallery and sat down in the shade of the honeysuckle vines.

“Bell alright; ’cep’ for her nasty, jealous-hearted ways,” he argued to
himself.

The afternoon was hot and still. A quivering, dancing heat was visible in
the brilliant sunlight. Not a leaf stirred on the chinaberry trees by the
front fence. A few dejected chickens hid under the castor oil bush by the
step, their wings drooping, their mouths open, panting like jaded runners
after a weary race.

Bell was inside, looking after the pot of crawfish boiling on the
charcoal furnace. The swampy smell of the crawfish mingled with the odor
of red pepper, floated through the house and over the gallery, where Tom
was already in a deep slumber.

Bell came out to the front door and looked at him, then went back to
the kitchen. She sat down, gazing at the pot on the furnace, a strange
expression creeping over her face. For a long time she sat like one in
a profound study. Her eyes contracted, and she began to gnaw her thumb
nail abstractedly, a mask-like vacancy covering her face with dark
inscrutability. Passing her hand across her face slowly, she got up and
looked at the boiling crawfish. They were bright scarlet; they were
done. Taking a colander from the wall, she put it in the dishpan on the
table; then, lifting the pot from the fire, she emptied the seething mass
into the colander, shaking it well until all the water was out, then
put it on the window-sill to cool. Passing her hand across her mouth in
a cryptic manner, she went again to the front door and looked at Tom
furtively. He was sleeping soundly. She went back to the kitchen, and
taking the dishpan of hot water from the table, walked out to the front
gallery.

Tom was asleep. A deep, manly, snoring sleep held him fast.

“He wouldn’ know.... It’s so easy to trip,—to stumble. For de handle to
slip out my han’”.... The thoughts went chasing through her mind, as she
stood over him with the steam rising from the crawfish water like an
ominous mist.

“Dey say linseed oil good for scaldin’.... Tom got some in a bottle
yonder in de woodshed.... I know how to look aft’ him. Den he _gotta_
stay ’way from Susan”....

An unearthly yell started the quivering air.... The dishpan fell to
the floor with a jangling crash. “Have mercy! Lawd, have mercy!” Tom’s
reiterated cry sounded across the yard with pathetic appeal, the scalding
water tinctured with red pepper torturing him viciously.

No one saw the savage deed but the frightened chickens hiding under
the castor oil bush, and Bell swore that it was an accident. She was
arrested and sent to jail, but Tom maintained that she was innocent;
believing Bell’s flimsy story that she had stumbled against his foot.

“Who? Tom ain’ nothin’ but a plumb fool,” commented Seelan, as she left
the house after her visit of sympathy.

“Ain’ Tom know it never was Bell practice habit to th’ow trash water in
de front yard?... Comin’ clean th’oo de house to de front do’ to empty a
dishpan o’ scaldin’ water? Shucks! Tom des natchally childish.”

“You sho is right,” agreed Felo. “I ain’ never like Bell from de firs’
beginnin’. I ain’ trus’ _no_ ooman w’at got side-b’yeards growin’
’long-side her jaws like Bell got. Da’s a _bad_ sign.”

And so the comment continued for weeks among Tom’s friends wherever they
met.

After the bandage was removed from Tom’s eyes, the doctor told him that
he was hopelessly blind. His face took on a look of sudden despair, and
in a pleading tone, he said:

“Please suh, doctor, don’ joke me in my mis’ry.”

No one spoke. After a few seconds, Susan took hold of his hand, her
affectionate grasp, more eloquent than any spoken word, revealing to him
the awful truth of the doctor’s statement.

“Sweet man, Jesus,” he exclaimed, raising his head imploringly; “please
tell me w’at po’ Tom goin’ do!”

“You goin’ go home wid Susan, an’ set in yo’ chair yonder ’fo de fire,”
came the soft-toned, comforting reply. “An’ Susan goin’ look aft’ you des
like she did befo’.”

Then leading him by the hand, they left the doctor’s office and started
up the coast towards home.

Bell was tried before a jury, but as there was no available witness to
give testimony in the case, she was acquitted as innocent and ordered
by the court to go back to Georgia. “Back to de wilderness, whah she
b’lonks.” As Tom’s friends declared, with picturesque indignation.




The 4th of July meeting having been postponed on account of Tom’s
accident, it was scheduled to take place on All Saints’ Day, he being
sufficiently recovered to participate in the “interprise.”

In honor of his coming to live with Susan, the old house was “treated to
a fine fixin’-up.” The clapboard front was given a coat of pink-wash,
and the horseshoe over the door painted a vivid green. New turkey red
curtains were hung on all the windows; a new white marbled oilcloth
was bought for the long guest table in the middle of the room; fresh
shelf coverings of newspaper cut in fantastic scallops were put in the
safe and on the pot shelf against the wall; and the hearth bricks and
chimney-piece were treated to a new coat of red ochre. The floor was
scrubbed and sprinkled with brick dust; the cypress benches, scrubbed
and rubbed until the water-waves of the grain took on the appearance of
old satin. And Tom’s chair beside the hearth was given a comfortable
cushion covered with a piece of old plaid shawl. The mantelshelf was hung
with garlands of garlic and bay leaf, long strings of red pepper pods,
and bunches of onions. Two brightly-polished tomato cans, supporting
cocoanuts, filled the place of ornaments at each end of the mantelpiece;
and in the center stood a venerable steeple-top clock, telling that it
was near the time for the “members” to arrive. A glowing fire of magnolia
burrs and driftwood burned on the hearth; and the place had an impressive
air of humble, medieval cheer.

Aunt Susan came in from the next room, followed by Tom carrying an armful
of driftwood. She helped him put it on the pile in the chimney-corner,
then led him to his chair, handing him a corncob pipe, which she lighted
with an ember from the ashes. He began smoking, and Susan busied herself
fixing the pies in the safe, and raking the coals of fire about the large
iron pot of gumbo on the hearth. She had the air of the true mistress
of the inn. The careful precision with which her green-and-yellow
head-handkerchief was tied, and the dignity with which she wore her
stiff-starched gingham apron, might be looked upon as badges of innate
cleanliness and gentility.

Another entertaining detail was her cascade of bosoms in their
snug-fitting sacque of gray woolen, making one think of those large,
healthy, double-breasted Dutch women Rembrandt loved to paint with such
startling fidelity.




“Susan,” Tom called to her softly, “befo’ anybody git hyuh, I wan’ ax you
somh’n.”

“Yas, Tom, I’m list’nin’,” she answered.

He took a long pull at his pipe, blew the smoke out slowly, then said:

“If any de members hyuh tonight raise de queshton concernin’ Bell, you
ain’ goin’ leave ’um specify, is you?”

Walking over to his chair, Susan put her hand on his shoulder, and said
quietly:

“Is you ever known me to tamper wid de devil aft’ I done beat ’im out my
track?”

“You right, Susan. Da’s sufficien’,” he answered, and went on with his
peaceful smoking.

The first member to arrive was Scilla, a tall, buxom, good-natured young
woman with a snub nose and surprised-looking eyes. Her dress was a guinea
blue, of plain make, the “josey” very close-fitting. Her head was bare;
and her only ornamentation, a pair of large, flat, pearl earrings, which
seemed to heighten the bizarre expression of her humorous face and the
velvety sheen of her ebon complexion.

She came bursting into the room suddenly, calling out in mock-excitement:

“But no, Sis’ Susan! W’at you an’ Mr. Tom doin’, settin’ hyuh in de dark
together like ole folks? Nobody ain’ come yet? Dis de right night, ain’
it?”

“For Gawd sake, Scilla, don’ be so boist’us,” Susan replied, getting up
to light the lamps on the table, and quietly putting them in their places.

“O ’scuse me, Sis’ Susan; I didn’ know y’all was holin’ a wake,” returned
Scilla playfully.

“Gal, set down an’ be still like people,” said Tom. “You ain’ bin hyuh
for a week, an’ you mus’ be got some news to tell, ’side yo’ random talk.
Susan, bring de gal a cup o’ coffee an’ leave her git to business.”

“Da’s right, Mr. Tom. I wan’ make you laugh ’bout my w’ite folks,” Scilla
answered.

Susan brought her a cup of coffee, and took a seat on the opposite side
of the table. Scilla helped herself generously to sugar, and as she
stirred her coffee, began her gossip.

“You ain’ goin’ b’lieve me w’en I tell you I ain’ workin’ for Miss Mimi
no longer.” (Looks of astonishment from Tom and Susan.) “I des _had_ to
leave. You know, dey say niggers ain’ got no principle. But dey got a
whole lot o’ w’ite folks w’at ain’ a bit better.”

“Scilla, ain’ you shame to scandalize de people you gits yo’ livin’
from?” Susan asked in honest surprise.

“Who? Sis’ Susan, I ain’ say’n nothin’ w’at ain’ true. Is Miss Mimi ever
paid you anything for de many times I comed hyuh an’ borried yo’ gahlic
an’ peppers an’ seas’nin’ an’ things to put in her vittuls w’en she had
big comp’ny to her house? Try’n to make a show, an’ lookin’ to de niggers
to help her out?... Who? Dat ain’ w’at I calls principle.”

“Gal, don’ talk so fas’,” Susan told her. “I’m knowin’ Miss Mimi ever
since she was a baby-chile.”

“But she done los’ her baby-ways now; an’ you ain’ know her since she
growed up an’ got ways like dey say us niggers got.”

“Scilla, you sho is crittacul,” said Tom. “Go ’head an’ talk w’at you
start to talk.”

Scilla looked towards Susan for permission to go on. Finding no
objection, she continued:

“’Tain much to tell. I des wan’ let you know I lef’ Miss Mimi ’cause I
des natchally got tired seein’ her losin’ her self-respec’, an’ hyeahin’
w’ite folks talkin’ ’bout her behin’ her back evvy time dey seen me.
Bein’ a nigger, how could I make ’um shut dey mouth? So de bes’ thing for
me to do was to quit.”

“You didn’t go ’way hap-hazzud, widout givin’ notice, did you?” Susan
inquired, with a note of severity in her voice.

“No,” Scilla answered. “We come to a understannin’ a whole day befo’ I
lef’.... ’Twas on a Sad’dy mawnin’; an’ she was goin’ have comp’ny for
dinner de nex’ day; an’ she say she want me to try and git her some
vi’lets for de table, same as I always bin doin’.

“You see, evvy time she gived a big dinner, she had to have flowers for
de front room an’ de dinner table; an’ nothin’ but vi’lets would please
her. She ain’ had but a few scat’rin’ vi’lets in her own yard; so w’at
she mus’ do but sen’ me all over Gritny to git vi’lets from anybody w’at
had ’um in dey gahden.—An’ she ain’ offer to pay for ’um, no.

“So you kin un’stan how shame’ I felt;—callin’ at people gate an’ axin’
for vi’lets for Miss Mimi, an’ ain’ had a dry nickel to pay for ’um.

“One nice w’ite lady dey calls Miss Tillie, always gimme w’at she had in
her gahden. But some dem stingy Dutch people w’at had plenny vi’lets,
wouldn’ gimme nothin’.

“One day, one ole red-head lady tol’ me I was lyin’. Dat Miss Mimi ain’
sont me for no vi’lets; dat I was beggin’ ’um for my own self.... Den I
got mad.—People takin’ me for a fatal rogue; an’ I ain’ had no way to
convince ’um I was jes’ try’n to do de w’ite folks wishes. So I went
straight back an’ give Miss Mimi de complete un’stannin’, an’ let her
know ’bout her position wid de vi’lets de same as mine. Den I tol’ her
I’d come cook de dinner dat Sunday, an’ help her out wid de comp’ny; but
she cert’ny had to git somebody else to hunt flowers for her; ’cause it
sho made me feel strange to have all Gritny suspicion me on a cheap li’l
thing like a few scat’ring vi’lets.”

As she paused for breath, Tom gave an emphatic grunt by way of surprise,
and asked rather dubiously:

“So da’s how come you quit? I thought w’en you commence to talk you was
goin’ tell somh’n; but you done talked all ove’ yo’ mouth an’ ain’ tol’
nothin’ yet.”

“Who, Mr. Tom?” Scilla returned, having recovered sufficiently to being
another pasquinade. “You ain’ think I’m play’n’, is you? Jes’ lemme git
started talkin’ ’bout w’ite folks funny ways, an’ you sho will lissen
w’at I’m tellin’ you.... But lemme shet up,” she added hurriedly; seeing
the form of another visitor entering the front door. “’Cause hyuh come
Mr. Felo; an’ too many witness ain’ good w’en it come to havin’ a
coat-scrape.”




Felo was a short, stoop-shouldered, yellow man of about thirty; his
face having a set look which seemed to give the impression that he was
constantly anticipating unpleasant news. He was dressed in a neat,
heterogeneous fashion, his garments quietly declaring themselves
donations from various male members of his “white folks family.”

As he came into the room, he saluted the house with an eloquent gesture,
then exclaimed, raising his right hand high above his head:

“Peace an’ happiness to de castle; an’ glad titus (tidings) to
who-some-ever gathered hyuh tonight in Gawd’s name!”

Going over to the fire, he shook hands with Tom; then turning to the
women, said:

“Sis’ Susan, how you do? An’ ole loud-mouth Scilla, w’at you got to say?”

Scilla laughed good-naturedly at the sally, and before she could reply,
Tom said:

“Leave Scilla stay quiet, Felo, for Gawd sake. She done talk so till my
head feel feev’ish lis’nin’ at her.” Then addressing Scilla, he said:
“Gal, shet yo’ mouth, an’ leave Felo tell us how him an’ Sis’ Fanny
gittin’ ’long yonder.”

Sis’ Fanny was Felo’s mother. She was a small, gentle-mannered, energetic
old woman, whose sole interest in life was the comfort and welfare of
her numerous grandchildren. She sold cakes and vegetables about the
village for a livelihood; accepting from Felo whatever assistance he
felt inclined to give her from his limited income as butler “to Mr. Amos
house, ’cross de river.”

“Ma Fanny home, yonder”; Felo answered, “runnin’ roun’ worrin’ ’bout dem
no-count chillun. She well; but she cert’ny a p’ovokin’ ole soul ’bout
dat hog she got yonder. She ain’ sattafy havin’ seven head o’ chillun to
wait on her, but gotta wait for me to come home from ’way ’cross de river
on Sunday, for me to run all over Gritny to hunt slop. Da’s w’at make me
so late gittin’ hyuh tonight; had to tote slop from fo’ diffunt places.”

“Who, Mr. Felo?” Scilla exclaimed in astonishment. “Had to tote slop on
Sunday, an’ big All Saints Day, too?”

“Hog got to eat on Sunday same as people, ain’t it?” Felo asked,
rebukingly.

“You gotta watch out whah you take slop from dese days, Mr. Felo,” she
advised warningly. “Some people got nice slop, an’ some people slop is
sho treach’ous. My cousin, down de coas’, had a hog w’at got his th’oat
cut clean thoo, from eatin’ slop w’at had razor blades in it. Sho did.
An’ ever since dat time, my cousin make her chillun sif’ evvy bit o’ slop
dey brings home.”

“How come Sis’ Fanny don’ sell de hog?” asked Susan. “Hog meat bringin’
good price at the butcher shop dis time o’ year.”

“Da’s w’at I bin tellin’ her”; said Felo, “but she so cawntrary she won’
lissen. She say she keepin’ it to be a mother hog.”

The sudden arrival of Nookie put an end to any further intimate details
which might have embroidered Felo’s domestic plaint. Her fantastic
attire, as well as her dramatic entrance, made her the immediate object
of attention.

She was a fat, glossy-black young woman, with shining eyes and teeth,
fully conscious of the charms of both. Her dress was an antiquated
blue silk creation of long-past glory; the skirt much-beruffled; the
basque-front prodigal with “coffee-dipped” oriental lace, cascading from
her neck far below the waist line. Her hat was a piece of home-evolved
millinery, large and laborious; made of plaited pink crepe paper,
a home-cured sea gull encompassing its luxuriant dimensions, with
outspread, tethered wings. She carried a long handled parasol of blue
silk, rich in rents and uncovered ribs; and over her arm was a faded,
black cashmere cape, with remnants of fringe and ravished beads.

“But no, Nookie!” Susan exclaimed, after she had recovered from her
surprise. “Whah you bin paradin’ today, droped-up in all yo’ curuss
clo’se an’ gommux (garments)? Dis ain’ no Mardi Gras day.”

“Maybe Nookie bin yonder to de simmetery to put flow’hs on somebody
grave. You know dis All Saints day,” volunteered Felo, with a playful
smile. “No I ain’t,” replied Nookie, arranging her lips with studied care
so as to display the whiteness of her fine teeth. “I des come from up
de road; from seein’ dat ooman w’at give birth to a baby half-chile an’
half-turtle.”

“Nookie, set down an’ stop yo’ humbug, for Gawd sake,” said Tom,
reprovingly. “You ain’ talkin’ to no chillun.”

“Gawd knows, Mr. Tom”; she assured him, “I ain’ tellin’ no false. Ain’t
you bin read de newspaper day-befo’ yistiddy? Evvybody was talkin’ ’bout
it. An’ I say: I’m goin’ see for myself. De paper say dey was goin’
sell it to de Chaddy Hospitle for $8,000 to put in a’kahol. An’ dey had
flocks o’ people goin’ up yonder in misheens to see it. Dey say de ’ooman
husban’ ain’ had nothin’ to do but stan’ at de front do’ an’ c’leck all
dem fifty-censes in a hat. Dey was chargin’ only a dime; but de crowd
got so plennyful, dey had to raise de price to fo’-bits. So I thought I
better go see befo’ dey raise it higher.”

As she paused for breath, Susan said to her:

“Nookie, stop yo’ random, an’ talk somh’n people kin b’lieve w’en dey
lissen at you.”

“Gawd knows, Sis’ Susan,” declared Nookie with emotion, “w’at I’m say’n
is de dyin’ truth from hyuh to heav’n. I bin yonder an’ seen de chile,
sho’ nuff. An’ I bet if you seen all dem people droppin’ money in de hat,
it goin’ make you feel like wishin’ you had bawned de chile yo’ own self.
Yas Ma’am, I bin went to look at it.”

“An’ ain’ seen nothin’ but a ill-form chile,” scoffed Felo. “Somh’n kin
happen to any fam’ly.”

“Who, Mr. Felo?” she retorted. “I know w’at I seen. I went ’long-side de
bed, an’ w’en I look at him, de chile commence wavin’ his li’l turtle
han’ at me, an’ I say: ‘Feet help body!’—An’ I ain’ wait to see no mo’.
’Cause I know if dat thing start to talk, da’s goin’ be de end o’ de
worl’. So I broke out de house an’ made for de road.”

“An’ runned up in hyuh wid a lie in yo’ mouth,” Felo added quickly.

“Mr. Felo, g’way from hyuh!” Nookie replied, with apparent irritation.
“You might know a heap o’ things ’bout keepin’ house for w’ite folks an’
lookin’ after Sis’ Fanny hog yonder, but Gawd got a whole lot o’ seecut
ways you sho don’ know nothin’ ’bout.”

“Ain’t it true,” commented Susan, with a grunt of Christian approval.

“Sho is.” Nookie continued. “I know one cullud lady back o’ Gritny, was
_comme ça_ one time; an’ she went to go take her daughter place an’ wash
for a strange w’ite ooman. An’ w’en she went in de shed to fix de tubs
an’ things, w’en she raise up de tub, she seen it full o’ duck feathers.
Den a li’l w’ile aft’wuds, w’en her chile was bawn, ’stid it havin’
natchal furze und’ de arms an’ on de ches’, like people got; de thing
had duck feathers growin’ on him. An’ evvy time it rained w’en he growed
up, he had to go swimmin’ in de cunnal. Sho did. An’ he live’ to be
thirty-some-odd years old; w’en he got drownded try’n to harpoon a buf’lo
feesh.”

With a look of playful commiseration, Felo said to her:

“Gal, come set down to de table an’ take a li’l nur’shment.” Then
addressing Susan: “Give de gal a plate o’ gumbo, Sis’ Susan. She talkin’
out her head bein’ hongry an’ patigue aft’ dat long walk she had up de
road.”

Susan got up and filled a plate with gumbo and put it on the table.
Nookie went over to Felo and gave him a gentle slap of appreciation on
the back of his head, saying to him, as she sat down to eat:

“Gawd knows, Mr. Felo, you sho kin read people mind.”

Further conversation was interrupted by the arrival of old Uncle Foteen;
a venerable, picturesque relic of antebellum days, leaning heavily on a
broom handle walking stick.

Felo placed a chair for him near the fire; and after taking his tattered
hat and walking stick and putting them on the bench across the room,
Susan handed him a cup of coffee, giving him kindly greeting:

“Unc’ Foteen, we sho please’ to see you. You ain’ bin hyuh for a long
time. But look like evvything alright wid you; an’ you got yo’ good
strank yet.”

“Yas, Sis’ Susan,” he replied thoughtfully, nodding his impressive white
head. “Ole Foteen still hyuh ’munks de livin’ to wait on de fam’ly an’
give thanks in de kingdom. W’en I puts my right foot down, I say: Thank
Gawd. An’ w’en I takes my lef’ foot up, I say: Praise de Lawd.”

“A-men.” Came the fervent response from Tom.

“Drink yo’ coffee, Unc’ Foteen; an’ lemme fix you a plate o’ gumbo, an’
you kin eat ’fo de fire to yo’ sattafaction,” said Susan, uncovering the
fragrant pot.




Uncle Foteen had become a legend in the village, as simple country people
often do. Everybody knew of his connection with the Guillaume family;
and his story of loyalty and faithful servitude was told again and again
by the new generation of colored people; with admiration by some, with
undue censure by others. For many years before the Civil War, Uncle
Foteen’s genial usefulness in the Guillaume household resembled that of
Coventry Patmore’s “Briggs,” who was

    “Factotum, butler, footman, groom,
    Who helped the gardener, fed the pigs,
    Preserved the game, and drove the brougham”....

Being sometime valet to “ole Marse Sylvain,” coachman to Mamzelle Olympe,
and impressive major domo of the dining-room on every festive occasion.

After emancipation was declared, and old Foteen was given his freedom,
he asked to remain with the family in the old capacity; and he was given
a home in the quarters, rent free as long as he lived; wages for his
services; and was taken care of with every attention due so worthy a
retainer.

One by one, the members of the family passed on to the Great Beyond, none
remaining to enjoy the luxury of the fine old house and carry on the
splendid family tradition except Madame Guillaume and young Sylvain,
her son; who was away availing himself of the benefits of one of the
“big Yankee colleges”;—a fact both abhorrent and inexplicable to many of
Madame’s unreconstructed Creole friends.

Picturesque and solitary, she lived on through the changing years,
dreaming of the fateful past and looking forward with childish
expectation to the home-coming of her accomplished son.

Her daily life was ordered with little change from the old-time dignity
and convention: Aunt Choote and her numerous children looking after the
household and kitchen; Uncle Foteen driving her to church on Sunday in
the old creaking barouche, taking part in her sentimental reminiscences,
and sharing the fitful dreams and wandering fancies of forgetfulness that
became actualities to both their weary minds.

One morning old Choote announced to the astonished members of her family
that Madame Guillaume was “ceasded.”

Going to the bedroom door with the customary cup of early morning black
coffee, there was no response to her gentle knock. She approached the
bed-side fearfully, and lifting the mosquito net, found her old Madame
“stone-col’, her body hyuh an’ her soul yonder.”

Young Sylvain being abroad with a party of tourists, the funeral was held
without his being present. Several weeks later, he was expected home, and
the lonely old house was undergoing elaborate preparations befitting his
return. Uncle Foteen was going about, a pathetic figure, re-living the
seeming reality of his past importance; mistaking young Sylvain for his
old master, and telling everyone he met, that “ole Marse Sylvain done
come home, an’ de fam’ly goin’ have big jubilation.”

When Sylvain arrived, Uncle Foteen embraced him with unrestrained
emotion; calling him master; giving him lively accounts of the imaginary
doings of the departed family; and rejoicing in the prospect of driving
him to church on Sunday, “to show him off to all Gritny, settin’ up proud
in de barouche, ’long wid Ma’am Guillaume, Mamzelle Olympe, an’ all dem
chillun.”

Sylvain soon discovered that the old man’s memory was uncertain, and he
humored his infirmity. “He bin childish for a good w’ile,” Choote told
him. “An’ he mistake evvbody for somebody else bin dead a long time.”

Knowing her husband’s vagaries would be overlooked with understanding
sympathy, Choote permitted Uncle Foteen to take his old post in the
diningroom and preside in the usual, formal way. When evening came and
Sylvain was called to dinner, he arose to go, a reluctant, solitary
guest. On entering the diningroom, he was amazed to find the table
arranged for six persons. No detail was overlooked. The guest linen and
fine china had been brought out; cape jasmines, his mother’s favorite
flowers, were in the old rock crystal bowl as a center piece; and the
quaint old silver candlesticks, lugubrious with towering white candles,
lighted the silent room with an eerie glow he remembered as a little
child. Uncle Foteen, in his faded uniform, was standing behind his chair,
ready to see him comfortably seated in the master’s place at the head of
the table.

Leaving Sylvain’s chair, he visited the vacant chairs each in turn,
sliding them in place gently, until each imaginary member of his
respected family was seated in the accustomed manner. Each in turn,
throughout the various courses of the meal, he visited the spectral
guests, watching attentively as he saw them in fancy helping themselves
to the tempting food; and smiling with grateful pleasure on beholding his
honored family gathered once more in convivial assembly.

It was a well-known tale in the village; a tale Uncle Foteen loved to
repeat. The facts were real to him; the occasion, a memorable one; and
the actors, living personalities. No one thought of arguing with him the
verity of his story, or regarding his vision as a worthless, fleeting
dream. It was a fancy that brought him comfort and solace to brighten the
hours of his waning years. He knew that his beloved white folks lived
again, and he walked and talked with their gentle spirits wherever he
happened to be.




Uncle Foteen sat before the pleasant fire enjoying his plate of gumbo
with childish satisfaction, apparently oblivious of the rumble of
conversation in the room.

“Po’ ole soul sho havin’ a party by his own self wid dat plate o’ gumbo.”
Scilla remarked softly.

“An’ he ain’ to be blame for it, either.” replied Nookie. “’Cause Sis’
Susan gumbo des natchally make you _leche li doigts_,—like my ole man use
to say, ’fo he went away.”

“Whah old ugly Plunkum gone, Nookie?” asked Felo. “Nobody ain’ seen him
for Gawd knows how long.”

“An’ nobody ain’ carin’ to see him, either; if dey feels like I feel
’bout ole Plunkum,” she answered disdainfully.

“Go ’long, gal, wid yo’ reckless talk,” said Susan. “Leave Plunkum come
back home tomorrow, an’ nobody but _you_ goin’ turn out full fo’ce to
give him welcome; an’ you know it good.”

“Who, me, Sis’ Susan? It be only one way you see me turn out to give
Plunkum welcome. An’ dat’ll be to cut his head in fo’ diffunt ways,—shawt
an’ long, an’ wide an’ deep. An’ cut de palms his feets in de bargain, so
he can’t run no mo’. Yas Ma’am.”

“Gawd knows, Nookie,” said Tom, speaking slowly, “for a young ooman w’at
bin well-raise’, you sho kin make a whole lot o’ nigger noise.”

“Anybody come to be a nigger, Mr. Tom, w’en dey git mixed up wid a nasty
Pharisee like ole Plunkum ... layin’ up in my house for seven long mont’s
aft’ he done marry me lawful; livin’ on my good bounty, an’ ain’ done a
lick o’ work, an’ ain’ thinkin’ ’bout doin’ none; lookin’ for me to feed
an’ suppoat him; an’ raisin’ a roocus w’en I refuse to leave him put on
de w’ite folks clo’se I was washin’, so’s he could go ’long wid de Odd
Fellows purrade an’ strut like Pompey!... Who?... You know yo’self, Mr.
Tom, Gawd ain’ goin’ be patient wid a rogue like dat.”

“An’ it tuck you seven long mont’s to make up yo’ min’ ’bout Plunkum
ways?” Scilla asked, quizzically.

“I was lookin’ ove’ my min’ for a long time ’bout w’at I was goin’ do,”
she answered. “But my passion struck me all at once. So one evenin’, w’en
Plunkum had plague’ me so till I des couldn’ stan’ it no longer; I up wid
my potato-stomper was stannin’ on de pot shelf, an’ I played de thing
all up an’ down de back his head, till he vomit.... Den w’en I seen him
look so mizzabul an’ downcas’; I went an’ fix him some sedlitz powders to
quiet him.

“I fix de blue paper one in a cup o’ water firs’, an’ made him drink it;
den I fix de w’ite paper one in de cup, an’ made him drink dat.... An’
people, you ain’ goin’ b’lieve me w’en I tell you; ’twasn’ no time befo’
dey had to ride him to de hospital in de groc’ry wagon, de tawment inside
him was carryin’ him such a road! Yas Lawd.... Dat nigger was fit to
explode any minute. An’ he sho did holler an’ cry.

“W’at dey did to him yonder, I ain’ never hyeah’d tell. But he mus’ bin
make up his min’ to go some yuther direction; ’cause Plunkum ain’ _never_
come back to my house.”

“An’ you call yo’self a Chrishtun, an’ practice devilment like dat?”
Felo asked, reprovingly. “Is Plunkum any child o’ Gawd?” she asked,
indignantly. “De Bible say: overcome yo’ enemy; don’t it?... Plunkum ain’
nothin’ but gutter water!”

The running laughter of the women at this juncture broke into a merry
peal. Uncle Foteen awakened from a pleasant doze and looked around
bewildered, just as the stentorian sound of a man’s voice was heard
outside, exclaiming:

“Great-day-in-de-mawnin’! Who is you? Makin’ all dis racket up in hyuh so
soon, an’ night ain’ begin to fall good yet.”

Coming into the room, he announced himself:

“Good evenin’ to evvbody; an’ peace to de hyuhafter.”

Pointing to a chair near Tom, Susan said to him:

“Take a chair, an’ set down, Nat; an’ take dat hat off yo’ head w’en you
come befo’ comp’ny.”

Nat rolled his large, shining eyes at her in playful annoyance, and
walked over to the chair and sat down; throwing his hat across the floor
with a sweeping gesture.




Nat was a notable personality in the village, and was the exclusive
pride and perennial delight of every one along the coast. He was
a composite of farmer, philosopher and clown; with the face of a
contemplative monk and the manner of a harmless mountebank. He was
very black and very bow-legged; the latter being accepted by him as a
fortunate asset rather than a calamity. It served him as an individual
trade mark in his calling, which was that of truck gardening. His
vegetables, he declared, were unlike the product of any other planters of
seeds; they were distinctive, facsimiles of himself, and he took great
pleasure in making it known. Everybody knew his “bow-legged punkins
an’ bow-legged egg-plants”; and no other vendor could boast of the
“bow-legged butterbeans and fat bow-legged squash” like Nat’s.

He peddled his seasonable wares through the village in a large, flat
basket made of willow slats, placed on top of a clumsy sled built of
rough-hewn cypress fence pickets, dragged by an unshorn, meditative old
mule he called Maybe-so. Walking bare-footed Nat followed behind; his
loose-fitting blue cottonade trousers flapping about his dusty ankles; a
broad-brimmed Chinese-looking hat made of palmetto, tilted humorously on
his round woolly head.

As he went along, he kept up a confidential conversation with the mule,
about the weather; the condition of the road; the pest of bugs on the
young potato plants; or any subject that occupied his mind when he was
not vociferating the virtues of his bow-legged merchandise to attract the
attention of chance customers.

He also had a company of two or three nondescript dogs following in his
wake. They seemed to understand all his moods and movements; looking
at him with rapt interest when he talked to them; and watching with
appealing glances when he shouted some vehement command. They knew they
were not to move another step when they heard him call to Maybe-so, and
saw the old mule stop before the gate of one of his regular customers.
They would sit down in the road precipitously and wait patiently while an
argument ensued; and as soon as orders were given to march, they rose up
with renewed anticipation; and with tails erect, they started off as soon
as Maybe-so made the first step.

If at any time they disregarded the rule, Nat would call to the mule to
halt; the dogs would be reprimanded for being “too much in a hurry,” and
would be told to “wait till Nat’s ready to go. Nat ain’ fol’rin’ you; you
fol’rin’ _Nat_.”

Whether they wanted to buy or not, the people came out to greet him as
soon as they heard the sound of his superb voice. He would stand in the
road and call out his rhythmic chant, announcing himself, his wares, his
companionable mule and family of dogs:

    “Hyuh bow-legged Nat,
    Early in de mawnin’.
    Maybe-so, Nat, an’ bow-legged onions;
    Bow-legged cawn, an’ bow-legged punkins;
    Leave-it-lay, Scawl, an’ one-eye Companyun.
    Come out an’ peep at Nat bow-legged cucumbers;
    Bow-legged Maybe-so fresh from de country.
    Bow-legged red peppers picked off de pepper bush;
    Come buy yo’ vegetables,
    Early in de mawnin’.”

After the bartering was finished, Nat would take up the reins again; and
as soon as the mule heard him say, “Nat’s gone,” off he would start; the
dogs following with wagging tails, apparently pleased with the thought of
another pilgrimage.




Susan crossed the room and picked up the hat from the floor where Nat had
thrown it, and as she hung it on the rack, said to him:

“You mus’ bin strollin’ out today. I see you got on yo’ shoes an’ a clean
shirt, an’ done took off yo’ cottonade breeches; but you ain’ laid aside
dis ole palmeeter hat. W’at Rose doin’, she can’t look after you no
better, an’ make you dress yo’self ’cawdin’ to de season?”

“Rose too busy, Sis’ Susan.” he answered.

“W’at Rose got to do make her so busy?” she asked in surprise. “Nobody
but Roxy an’ you in de house to bother ’bout, ain’t it?”

“Rose ’tenshun so taken up wid dat sweet Lucy wine she git yonder to
Mr. Camille sto’, Sis’ Susan, she don’ know de diffunce twix’ July an’
Janawerry.”

“Ain’t Roxy ole enough to take charge an’ look aft’ yo’ clo’se an’ things
for you?” asked Felo.

“Roxy ole enough,” Nat answered assuringly, “but she too occapied lookin’
aft’ dem boys, an’ makin’ matrimony wid evvy one comin’ ’long de road.”

“Unc’ Nat, ain’t you shame?” Scilla exclaimed. “Settin’ hyuh befo’ all
dese people, scand’lizin’ yo’ own chile name like dat?”

“Roxy ain’ shame, is she?” he replied bluntly. “She ain’ talkin’ ’bout
it, but dat ain’ keepin’ people from knowin’ she totin’ somh’n under her
a-pun right now, is it?”

“Y’oughta chastise her if you feel sho you ain’ makin’ no mistake,” said
Tom.

“Mistake or no mistake,” commented Nookie, “y’oughta quit yo’ blabbin’
’bout it.”

“W’at y’all mean?” Nat asked with impatience. “Roxy ain’ commit no
terr’ble crime, is she? She ain’t hurt nobody fatal. Roxy ain’ did
nothin’ but follow de feelin’s of a natchal ooman, curuss to know somh’n
convincin’ concernin’ de seecut workin’ of a ’ooman life. An’ all she
done was de li’l thing some foolish ole misun’stannin’ people done
classify in de bad lis’ und’ de headin’ o’ sinful ways.”

“Den you means to uphol’ Roxy ’long de brazen road she takin’?” asked
Scilla, staring at him in amazement.

He deliberated a few seconds, then answered:

“I means to keep my min’ from gittin’ upset ’bout somh’n I ain’ got no
cuntrol over. Roxy jus’ like she come hyuh to dis life; wid evvything
jus’ like ’twus inten’ to be. An’ Roxy ain’ no diffunt from you an’ no
yuther wimmins. An’ nature ways is Gawd ways; an’ I ain’ got no right to
meddle. An’ you can’t say I ain’ correck, if you wan’ leave yo’self tell
de true.”

“Dah, bless Gawd!” Felo exclaimed with enthusiasm. “Unc’ Nat, you sho
spoke somh’n dat time.”

“W’at you know ’bout wimmin ways, ole ugly Felo?” Nookie inquired
indignantly. “Is you done come to be a big jedge, like all de yuther
hypocrite niggers w’at spen’ all dey time livin’ ’munks de w’ite
folks?... Lookin’ down scawnful on yo’ own color ways; tryin’ to make us
nigger people pattun aft’ de w’ite folks?”

“Anybody heard me say a word ’bout w’ite folks bein’ diffunt?” Felo
demanded, looking about from one to the other. “Far as I bin able to
’zern, dey ways resemble each-another. Only de w’ite folks ways mo’
seecut.... Dey thinks a heap ’bout w’at dey doin’. Dey does it on de sly.
’Tain’ nobody business.... But you never see ’um lose dey self-respec’.
Dey puts on a front, an’ dey all gits by. Dey hides dey looseness, an’
you gotta give ’um praise. But look at de cullud folks. How dey do?...
Dey ain’ stop to bother ’bout self-respec’; w’at people goin’ think. Dey
jus’ cuts loose.... Dey natchal as de cattle an’ fowls’ an’ things. An’
_Gawd_ de only man to tell if dey doin’ somh’n wrong.”

Apprehensive that an unpleasant dispute was under way, Susan said to them:

“Y’all better stop talkin’ to one-’nother so plain. Firs’ thing you know,
you goin’ be sorry.”

Almost immediately she became aware that her fears were needless; for
she heard outside the sound of voices mingled with the drone of weird
music played on a comb covered with tissue paper; and she knew that other
members had arrived.




The new-comers were Carmelite and Soongy, two pleasant-looking,
neatly-dressed young colored women; accompanied by a light brown-skin boy
about fourteen years old, known to every one as Dink, the comb-player. He
was a merry-faced, accommodating young troubadour, willing to lend his
talent on any chance occasion; making his ravishing music on the comb for
the sheer love of the thing itself, and the simple reward of a “plate
full o’ vittuls an’ a cup o’ somh’n-’nother to drink.”


Soongy was his aunt, and was extravagantly proud of his musical ability.
“Dink ain’ no master min’ by no means”; she would say, when speaking of
his attainments, “but he sho got it all in his head. An’ nobody ain’
learned him, either.”

Dink’s repertoire was a remarkable one. It included all the “himes” and
mellows and “Dr. Watts” sung by the Baptist and Methodist congregations,
reaching from “Wes’wego ferry landin’, clean down de coas’ to Gritny
in de Eas’ Green”; all the “ballets” and “sinful songs” disseminated by
“backsliders” and “evil-workers”; and many haunting fragments of “make-up
songs,” the invention of Dick’s harmonious mind.

His voice, whether used for singing, or for making music through the
comb, was true and melodious; having the clear, sensuous timbre of
adolescence that won the admiration of his most orthodox listeners. “De
Sperret goin’ stop his shoo-fly ways one dese days; an’ den dey ain’
goin’ be _nobody_ kin tetch him raisin’ his voice to give Gawd de praise
he done helt back for so long;” the old church members would comment,
after having listened to some of the “shoo-fly ballets.”

After friendly greetings were exchanged all around, and the new arrivals
were seated comfortably, Susan asked Carmelite:

“W’at you doin’ on dis side de river tonight? You ain’ give up yo’ place
to Miss Newgeem house, is you?”

“Yas ma’am,” Carmelite answered languidly. “I bin lef’ her a long time.”

“An’ you ain’ doin’ nothin’?” Susan questioned.

“Yas ma’am; I ain’ idle,” she answered reassuringly. “I’m sewin’ on
quilts, yonder to my house. An’ I sho got some nice ones to sell. Made
out o’ all kind o’ pretty scraps I gethered up ’munks de w’ite folks;
an’ dey ain’ cos’ me a nickel.”

With calm misgiving, Susan asked her:

“An’ quilts goin’ suppoat you an’ put clo’se on yo’ back, an’ puvvide you
wid shoes an’ vittuls an’ things?”

“If I can’t sell ’um, I sho kin raffle ’um.” Carmelite answered with
conviction. “An’ make much as I made workin’ up in Miss Newgeem
scrooched-up kitchen; onsatafied an’ fretful as I was all de time.”

“I thought you was please wid de place,” ventured Scilla.

“Who? Miss Newgeem de wrong one to make people feel please. She got such
fussy ways, she ain’ to be please her _own_ self. So da’s w’at make me
quit an’ go yonder to my quilts; whah I ain’ had to worry ’bout bein’
plagued all day long.”

“But Carm’lite,” began Soongy, by way of pleasant argument, “don’t you
fin’ sewin’ on quilts is mo’ taxin’ work den cookin’ for a small fam’ly
like Miss Newgeem got? I fin’ it mo’ combinin’, me.”

“’Tain de cookin’, Soongy,” Carmelite explained. “It’s all de hum-bug you
gotta do: passin’ de dishes thoo hot water befo’ you brings ’um to de
table. An’ a fresh plate for evvy diffunt dish dey has to eat. An’ you
know yo’self, how long it take for dishes to dreen aft’ you done pass ’um
thoo hot water, an’ dey gotta be wipe besides.

“An’ Miss Newgeem got a whole lot o’ Japanee china dishes so thin you kin
see thoo ’um, an’ you gotta be careful how you tetch ’um. So one day, I
say to myself: I’m goin’ put de things in de oven an’ heat ’um all at
once an’ be done. So I put de plates an’ de cups in de oven, an’ push de
stove-do’ half-to, an’ set down to wait on ’um. An’ chile! Aft’ a w’ile,
I could hyeah dem things crackin’ up in de oven,—an’ I ain’ never had
_tetch_ ’um.

“An’ w’en I open de stove-do’ an’ looked at ’um,—chile, de dishes was so
wreckded, it took me _three_ dish towels to pull out _one_ plate.”

“You had good sense to go yonder to yo’ quilts,” Felo murmured in a
humorous undertone.

“I was goin’ leave her any way, so dat ain’ bin de thing made me quit,”
Carmelite answered, artlessly. “Miss Newgeem des natchally had too much
shiftin’ o’ de dishes for de fewness o’ de vittuls; an’ I ain’ never bin
used to eatin’ light.” At this reference to food, Susan became conscious
of a sense of lax hospitality, whereupon she said: “Dey got plenny gumbo
in dat pot you see stannin’ on de h’af; an’ plenny sweet potato pies
yonder in de safe; so you ain’ need to feel strange ’bout breakin’ yo’
fas’—lessen you bin et heavy befo’ you come hyuh dis evenin’.”

The suggestion was opportune. Smiles of appreciation from one to the
other showed that the invitation was agreeable to all.

Susan went to the safe and distributed plates to the women, and Nat and
Felo began placing chairs around the table. She filled the plates with a
generous portion of snowy rice and fragrant gumbo, and the women arranged
them on the shining new oil cloth.

“Great-day-in-de-mawnin’!” Nat exclaimed. “Sis’ Susan, you sho spoons out
dat gumbo wid a tantalizin’ scent! Set down, members, an’ smack yo’ lips;
an’ Gawd bless de cook for de feas’ dis evenin’.”

They gathered about the table with lively interest and sat down and
began eating. Uncle Foteen was sleeping quietly before the fire. Dink
was sitting across the room, looking on with wistful glances, and making
querulous music on the comb. On discovering his aloofness, Susan called
to him: “Boy, put dat comb out yo’ han’, an’ come set to de table an’ eat
yo’ vittuls. You ain’ hongry?”

Looking at her timidly, Dink answered:

“Yassam. But I come ’way from home in a hurry, an’ my haid ain’ comb’.”

Susan studied his face for a second, then said reprovingly:

“Boy, take dat comb you got in yo’ han’ an’ pass it thoo’ yo’ head, den
come set to de table.”

Having a better knowledge of the nature of Dink’s hirsute endowment than
Susan had, Soongy came to the rescue.

“Leave ’im be, Sis’ Susan,” she told her. “Leave ’im eat whah he settin’.
Wid dem grape-twisses Dink got on ’is head, it’ll take ’im all night to
git thoo bat’lin wid ’um.”

Accepting the plausibility of Soongy’s statement, Susan took Dink a plate
of gumbo and left him to enjoy it in his quiet corner alone. She went
back to the table to see that Tom was made thoroughly comfortable, and to
ply her guests with coffee and pies, and refill their plates with rice
and gumbo if they wanted more. Their enjoyment was keen and genuine;
enlivened with much playful banter and merry laughter, and amusing gossip
about the doings and sayings of the “w’ite folks;” which, after a while,
developed into a sort of philosophic commentary.

Nat’s oratory was in full flower, and Felo applauded him, an encouraging
ally. Always unorthodox in his views, his over-enthusiasm now became
offensive to the women, and their dissenting voices began to fill the
room with shrill echoes. Susan realized that a harsh dispute was imminent
and something had to be done to prevent it. The fortuitous whimpering of
Dink’s comb arrested her attention, and she welcomed the plaintive sound
as a divine interruption. Fixing her eyes on the front door, she arose
from her chair with unusual energy, and tapping her spoon on her plate
with a ringing sound, she called out:

“Stop dis racket up in hyuh! Y’all take my house for a honky-tonk? Quit
yo’ racket an’ try an’ talk like people.”

Her positive tone brought immediate silence. Everyone looked uneasily
towards the door, anticipating the entrance of some accusing moderator of
the peace. Seeing no one appear, Nat said:

“Gawd knows, Sis’ Susan, you oughta stop play’n chillun tricks, ole as
you is. W’at sattafaction you fin’ try’n to frighten people like dat?”

“You ain’ too ole to make racket, is you?” Susan asked quietly. “An’ w’at
sattafaction you fin’, mult’plyin’ words an’ ’sputin’ wid wimmins till
you stirs ’um up to hot blood an’ spiteful wranglin’,—an’ und’ my roof,
too? W’at you gotta say ’bout it?”

“For Gawd sake, stop y’all quoilin’ an’ set down,” interposed Tom. “Y’all
had to wait till big Sunday to gether hyuh an’ make a ruckus?... Susan,
whah dat boy gone wid de comb? Tell him to blow music on de thing an’
change dese niggers ’maginashun.”

A second request was unnecessary. Dink’s appetite being gratefully
appeased, his mental attitude was one of harmonious sociability.
Adjusting the tissue paper on his comb, he put the outlandish instrument
to his lips and began playing with spirit the old shout called “De
W’ite Horse Pawin’ in de Valley.” The merry melody floated through the
room, the infectious lilt taking possession of the listeners’ thoughts
and holding them captives to its insistent appeal. They began to sway
gently to-and-fro, their bodies, like their minds, intoxicated by the
captivating rhythm. The women began to hum; a low, melodious hum, like
the far-away sound of a colony of wood birds awakening at day-break. Then
the men joined the humming, and the sound recalled the droning of distant
village church bells, floating over quiet fields at sunset. And the
mingling of the voices made one think of the rumbling of November winds
chasing among the telegraph wires.

After a while, Felo began to sing the narrative lines of the song, the
others taking up the burden, and responding with growing fervor after
each line:

    “My Lawd command me to go in de wilderness.
      (W’ite horse pawin’ in de valley)
    W’at did I see w’en I went in de wilderness?
      (W’ite horse pawin’ in de valley).”

Then like a majestic wave of sound, rose the noble refrain:

    “In de valley, my Lawd,
    On my knees;
    In de valley, my Lawd,
    In de valley.
    In de valley, my Lawd,
    Down on my knees,
    I seen de w’ite horse pawin’ in de valley.”

Then back again to the tuneful story of adventure in the land of the
spirit:

    “Who heard my pray’rs w’en I prayed in de wilderness?
      (W’ite horse pawin’ in de valley)
    Who foun’ de road w’en I comed out de wilderness?
      (W’ite horse pawin’ in de valley).”

Then the chorus again, full, swinging and triumphant:

    “In de valley, my Lawd,
    On my knees;
    In de valley, my Lawd,
    In de valley.
    In de valley, my Lawd,
    Down on my knees,
    I seen de w’ite horse pawin’ in de valley.”

The tuneful tumult awakened Uncle Foteen from his peaceful sleep, and he
looked around the room bewildered, uncertain of his whereabouts. What did
the gathering mean? Why were they sitting around the long white table,
singing church songs? Whose wake was it? Who were they waiting for in the
dim, lamp-lighted room?

Looking at Susan appealingly, he asked:

“He ain’ come yet?”

She went over to the old man, and said to him quietly:

“Evvything alright, Unc’ Foteen. You bin sleepin’.”

Looking at her thoughtfully, he said with tremulous voice:

“If dat candle burn out befo’ Marse Sylvain git hyuh, we gotta put Ma’am
Guillaume away. You know, we ain’ ’lowed to keep her too long.”

“Unc’ Foteen, lemme fix you some coffee an’ milk,” Susan said pleasantly;
meaning to divert the old man’s thoughts. “An’ you all members, stop w’at
you singin’,” she called to the chorus, “an’ sing somh’n w’at goin’ make
Unc’ Foteen feel gay.”

Obeying Susan’s request, Dink began playing a rollicking melody on the
comb; patting his foot vehemently on the brick-sprinkled floor, to mark
the even time.

“Boy!” Felo called out to him indignantly, causing Dink to immediately
stop playing. “Quit yo’ ratty music, an’ play somh’n decen’ w’at goes wid
Sunday an’ fittin’ for Chrishtun people to sing.”

“Don’ pay ’im no ’tenshun, li’l boy,” Susan interposed. “Dis house my
meetin’-house; an’ if dey got people in de buildin’ displease wid de
himes an’ music an’ things, den leave ’um go some yuther place an’ hunt
till dey finds de thing w’at suits ’um. So go ’head, li’l boy, an’ play
an’ sing jes’ like yo’ min’ tell you.”

Further objection was useless after this declaration. Dink laid his comb
on the bench along-side of him, and leaning back against the wall, began
singing gaily:

    “W’en de moon be riz
      An’ come a-peepin’ thoo de branches o’ de ’simmon tree;
    Look like I hyeah ’im say:
      How come evvy night I see you watchin’ for me?...
    He don’ know I got a reason
    Brings me out hyuh evvy season,
      Lessen it be w’en de clouds is po’in down rain.”

It was a glorious moment. He knew that he was soloist supreme; that the
song was his individual possession, and nobody would venture to sing it
with him. He had them in his power. He would make Felo listen, whether or
no. Almost rapturously he went on:

    “Go ’long, moon,
      I want you to th’ow yo’ light behin’ de ’simmon tree.
    P’int de road
        So her w’ats comin’ hyuh to meet me’ll see.
    Th’ow yo’ shadders kind o’ fancy,
    Des for me an’ my Nancy,
        Her w’at you hyeah come singin’ yonder in de lane.”

Having reached the end of the verse, his eyes skimmed the room for looks
of approval. Several of the listeners were smiling appreciatively.
Drawing a deep breath, he extended his chest imposingly, and went on with
the chorus:

    “W’en I hyeahs dat black gal sing,
      ’Tain no use to try an’ do another blessed thing;
    Feel like my foots done clean tuck wing,
      An’ my buzzum feel so strong.
    Umph-umph, people, you kin b’lieve my word,
    Her kind o’ singin’ you ain’ never, never, never heard.
    She des de same as a natchal wil’ mawkin’-bird,
      Bustin’ wid song!”

When Dink finished his happy serenade, Nat called to him:

“Boy, come over hyuh an’ tell me how ole you is.”

Dink looked appealingly at his aunt, and as he crossed over to Nat’s
chair, Soongy answered for him:

“He be fifteen years ole nex’ June, Unc’ Nat.”

“Boy, you sho got a gif’ straight from Gawd, quiv’in’ in dat th’oat o’
yone,” Nat said to him, patting him on the head patronizingly.

“A gif’ straight from de devil,” muttered Felo, looking at Nat and
batting his eyelids with impatience.

Nat reflected a while on the difference of opinion, then asked drily:

“Since w’en you got to be so frien’ly wid de devil, he done showed you
how to make ’videnashun ’twix w’at b’lonks to him an’ w’at b’lonks to
Gawd?”

“Is Gawd give people gif’s to th’ow ’way, tellin’ ’bout devilment,—goin’
’round singin’ all kind o’ sinful random; ’stid o’ raisin’ up dey voice
to give praise to de things Gawd done sanctify?”

“W’at things de boy tol’ about in de song you cunsider Gawd ain’
sanctify?” Nat asked solemnly. “Can’t be de man watchin’ for de moon
to come up behin’ de ’simmon tree. Dat ain’ natchal? Gawd ain’ sen’
de moon to shine, an’ make de water move, an’ help de plants to grow
in de groun’, an’ give light so people kin know de right road from
de wrong?—Dat ain’ natchal?... An’ Gawd ain’ make de sap rise in de
young ooman an’ de young man, stirrin’ ’um up like de sap stirrin’
in de ’simmon tree, till dey feels somh’n curuss drawin’ ’um to’ads
one-’nother?” He went on. “Dat ain’ natchal?

“An’ Gawd ain’ make de mawkin’-bird sing, settin’ in de aw’inge tree in
de moonlight whah ’is ole lady kin ketch de a-ko ’is voice, w’en she
settin’ lonely on top de aigs in de nes’?—Dat ain’ natchal?...

“Des like Gawd make de young man lif’ up ’is tenshun w’en he hyeah de
soun’ o’ de young gal voice, comin’ up de lane, singin’ bol’ so she kin
’tract ’im?—Dat ain’ natchal?... Shucks! Ole crazy nigger. You gotta
study yo’ lesson a heap mo’, befo’ you go ’roun’ hyuh preachin’ to
people so biggidy.”

Appearing fully satisfied with the delivery of his colorful remonstrance,
Nat turned to Dink and said quietly:

“Boy, go yonder an’ play on yo’ comb till you make dese squinched-up
niggers ’maginashun change, an’ dey finds out dat de sperret got yuther
ways o’ movin’ ’um ’sides preachin’ on Bible texes an’ things.”

“Dah, bless Gawd!” Nookie exclaimed. “Unc’ Nat done win. Done put Mr.
Felo out on a home run.”

“Felo ain’ gone, is he?” Tom inquired.

“No. Felo hyuh,” Susan told him.

“Mr. Felo, you ain’ goin’, is you?” Scilla asked solicitously.

“Who?” Felo replied, with calm amazement. “Felo goin’ stay right hyuh wid
y’all till de party break up.”

His resolve was greeted with merry laughter and good-natured raillery;
during which, Dink went back to his seat and began playing on the comb:

    “I’m goin’-a lay down my burden down by de river-side,
    Down by de river-side, down by de river-side;
    I’m goin’-a lay down my burden down by de river-side,
    An’ I ain’ goin’ study war no mo’.”

He came to the refrain, and every voice took up the words, singing with
increasing fervor, until the song rolled like a pæan of deliverance:

    “Ain’ goin’ study war no mo’
    Ain’ goin’ study war no mo’
    Ain’ goin’ study ... war ... no ... mo’....”

The stirring refrain was drawing towards the end, when the door opened
and another member came in.




The new-comer was a man about thirty years old; known to everybody in the
village as Gussie Fisky. He was well-built; with a wealth of unkempt,
reddish-blond hair, and a shaggy mustache of the same color. His eyes
were large and gray, and stared with a reckless, determined air. His
complexion was one of remarkable sallowness; and his features, while
plain and commonplace, were free from every negroid characteristic;
having certain regularities of cast that declared him indubitably a white
man, however ordinary the extraction.

A strange mystery surrounded Gussie’s origin. A mystery known to no one
except old Aunt Fisky, the kindly colored woman with whom he lived, the
only mother he had ever known.

There were many legends related regarding Gussie’s origin, his birth,
and his abandonment by his white family; some ribald, some romantic; any
of which Gussie never troubled himself to comment on or disprove. He
knew that he was white; that Aunt Fisky had raised him from infancy, and
had given him her name; that he had lived his inconsequent years among
illiterate Negroes; that it was sheer madness to hope to be received as
a fellow-man by white people who despised him; and that life was nothing
more than a merry game for anyone who could play it with a reckless
spirit.

And so he spent his days among his chosen companions, resigned to his
humble fate; satisfied with old Aunt Fisky’s motherly attentions, and
the squalid atmosphere of the poor shanty they called home; comfortable
with the boisterous young colored women who permitted him to bestow
upon them the freedom of his prodigal affection; and companionable with
the roustabouts and longshoremen with whom he worked and gambled and
caroused; imbibing their thoughts and ideas, adopting their dialect, and
imitating their manners and ways.




Gussie came lumbering into the room, scanning the faces of the singers
nervously. Finding himself suddenly yielding to the melody’s insistent
appeal, he lifted his raucous voice to join the chorus just as the song
came to an end.

With a disappointed look, he asked:

“W’at y’all stop for? Go ’head agin, an’ lemme sing wid you.”

“W’at you know ’bout singin’, ole w’ite nigger?” Felo asked,
half-jestingly. “Sho time to stop, w’en you come lopin’ up in hyuh an’
wan’ sing.”

It was a thrust that went deeper than Felo intended. Gussie understood
that the feeling with which he was accepted by his colored companions was
something more like tolerance than a feeling of genuine friendship; and
the fact, unpleasant as it was, made him conscious of a natural sense of
race pride and prejudice not easily overlooked.

With an indignant glare at Felo, he said:

“I know I’m w’ite, ole ugly nigger. But you ain’ got to tell me ’bout it.
I bin knowin’ you ever sence we was chillun playin’ together; but you
ain’ need to talk like dat befo’ all dis crowd.”

“Gussie,” Susan called to him quietly, “put yo’ hat yonder, an’ set down,
an’ don’ ack so boist’us. You ain’ bin hyuh for over three weeks, an’ now
you come an’ wan’ raise a confusion? Go set down an’ ack like people.”

Taking in the awkwardness of the situation with admirable tact, Carmelite
asked:

“Gussie, how much Aun’ Fisky chahges for a dozen duck aigs? I got one
muskovy duck home yonder I wan’ set befo’ de weather git too col’.”

“She bin gittin’ two-bits a dozen for ’um.” Gussie answered sullenly.
“But she ain’ got no mo’, now.”

“You mean she done sol’ all her ducks?” Carmelite persisted.

“No. She done sol’ all de aigs she had to Mr. Gully baker-shop.”

“Go ’way from hyuh, Gussie,” Carmelite answered, laughing. “W’at Mr.
Gully wan’ do wid duck aigs in a baker-shop?”

“To put in de cake for de weddin’, las’ night.”

“Who? Dey had a weddin’ yonder in Gritny las’ night?” Inquired Susan,
eager to hear further particulars.

“Yas’m.” Gussie replied, becoming more amiable. “Dat w’ite ooman dey call
Maggie Hutson. ’Twas her weddin.’”

“Lawd!” exclaimed Nookie in tones of great surprise. “You mean to say
ole Maggie Hutson done got her a husban’, aft’ de sinful life she bin
carryin’ all dese years up an’ down de road wid so many diffunt mens?...
Lawd! Gussie, tell it agin; so I kin lissen if w’at you tellin’ is somh’n
true.”

“Sho Gawd is.” Gussie assured her. “Maggie got her one husban’; an’
had her one sho-nuff weddin’, wid all de church bells ringin’; went
ridin’ all thoo de town, settin’ back on de ca’idge seat ’long-side her
fright’nes’-lookin’ skinny old man; wid a weepin’ veil hangin’ down
ove’ her face, an’ a aw’inge flower wreath settin’ ’cross her fawid;
jes’ a-bowin’ an’ smilin’ at people, like she wan’ show ’um she kin put
on wreath an’ veil even if she is look like somebody come off a bad
street.... Sho did. ’Twas like a fatal purrade goin’ roun’ Gritny.”

“Lawd, people! Lissen w’at Gussie sayin’.” Nookie exclaimed, laughing
heartily. “Settin’ up in a ca’idge, wid aw’inge flowers on her head,
brazen as she is! Lawd, people! Don’t you know da’s comical?”

“W’at make Maggie ain’ got de right to put aw’inge flowers in her head if
da’s her pleasure?” Came Nat’s dissenting voice. “Y’all niggers sho like
to fin’ somh’n wrong wid yuther people ways. Maggie got a right to put
mustud-greens, an’ twis’ cow-pea vines in her head if she fin’ it make
her look good; an’ if da’s de way her min’ be workin’.”

“But, Unc’ Nat,” Scilla essayed to explain in behalf of the sisterhood,
“de wimmins gotta think a li’l somh’n ’bout form an’ fashion, ain’t
dey?... Wearin’ aw’inge flowers public like dat sho is redic’lus; cheap
as Maggie bin made herself yonder in Gritny wid de mens.”

Getting up from his chair and gesticulating with both arms, as though
addressing a crowd on an open road, Felo called out:

“Stan’ back, members! Stan’ back, an’ make room. ’Cause us sanctified
sisters done commence pitchin’ rocks an’ stones.”

“Scilla ain’ spoke nothin’ w’at ain’ true,” Gussie interposed. “Evvybody
yonder know Maggie hist’ry.”

At this point Susan’s rumination became audible: “An’ all dem w’at don’t,
dey ain’ goin’ be long findin’ out, w’en yo’ mouf start runnin’.”

“Can’t help from knowin’ w’at I know, Aun’ Susan,” Gussie replied
hurriedly in self-vindication. “Ain’ I bin worked for Maggie, spadin’ her
garden, an’ w’ite-washin’ her kitchen; an’ bin had de freedom o’ de whole
house, day-time an’ night-time, too?”

With sharp impatience Nat called to him:

“Stop right whah you is, Gussie; befo’ you try to make we-all b’lieve you
had de freedom o’ somh’n else besides.”

Laughing boisterously, Gussie said:

“Money ain’ nothin’ but money w’en somebody got somh’n to sell, ain’t
it?... An’ one man ain’ look much diffunt from a yuther man in de
dark,—even if he do be w’ite.”

A sudden reprimand from Susan interrupted his laughter.

“Look, Gussie!” He heard her call. “Black or w’ite,—w’ichever color
you wan’ call it,—but you ain’ in no bar-room. Either yonder on de
levee-front. So you better talk diffunt talk, if you wanna stay hyuh a
li’l w’ile soshable dis evenin’.”

“I ain’ try’n to ack ugly, Aun’ Susan.” Gussie insisted. “I jes’ wan’
p’int out how Maggie try’n to make herself look like somh’n she _ain’t_.
Da’s all.”

Nat leaned forward in his chair, and clasping his knees with his brawny
black hands, braced himself for a philosophic argument.

“Nobody ain’ wan’ dispute Gussie dat he bin seen de aw’inge flowers an’
things Maggie had settin’ on top her head,” he went on. “But w’at we does
wan’ know: Is Gussie bin able to see de change w’at moughta took place in
Maggie tahminashun; an’ w’at de feelin’ inside de ’ooman was,—direckin’
Maggie to do w’at she was cunsider right?... You know de sperret ways
is sho myste’rous. An’ people gotta move accawdin’, w’en it strike you
un-beknownce.”

“Yas, Lawd.” Came a fervid antiphon of soprano voices.

“Who?... Yas indeed.” Carmelite agreed. “Sweet man Jesus is a heart-fixer
an’ a mind-regalator, too.”

“An’ nobody ain’ need to scawn Maggie aw’inge flowers, either”; Susan
added with calm assurance, “’aft de church ain’ found ’um comical, an’ de
pries’ done sprinkle ’um wid holy water.”

Felo got up and gave the fire a vigorous poke, and turned to the company,
saying:

“Stop y’all preachin’ on Maggie, for Gawd sake; an’ take yo’ tex’ from
somh’n cuncernin’ we-all color. Maggie ain’ nothin’ to we-all, no way.”

“You sho right, Felo,” Aunt Susan concurred. “An’ thank you for sayin’
so.... An’ look,” she suggested genially, “some you mens oughta go yonder
in de shed an’ fetch me a few sticks o’ wood for dis fire, befo’ it git
too low.”

Gussie and Felo left the room to get the wood. Susan began pottering
about the hearth. Nat fixed a pipe of tobacco, lighted it, and gave it to
Tom; then fixed one for himself and sat down and began smoking. Uncle
Foteen was nodding in his chair by the fireside. Dink began playing
softly on the comb, the women humming pleasantly with him, the soothing
melody of “Po’ Moanuh got a Home at Las’.” Before long, the wave of
discord had passed on, and the room became pervaded with a flood of
harmony; the potent spell of music lifting their emotional natures to a
sense of quiet, singing ecstasy and spiritual introspection. Felo and
Gussie came in with several sticks of wood, and before putting them down,
stood listening attentively.

“Lay ’um down easy, an’ leave Unc’ Foteen sleep.” Susan told them in a
half-whisper.

“Y’all peaceful an’ nice now,” Felo remarked, “but you sho goin’ have
noise up in hyuh w’en de circus come. Yonder Lizzie Cole an’ Chester
Frackshun comin’ outside. So you better make up yo’ min’ to lissen at a
loud racket w’en dey git hyuh.”

They took the announcement indifferently, and continued to sing until the
new arrivals appeared in the doorway.




Lizzie Cole was a buxom, merry-faced, happy-go-lucky young colored woman;
always eager for some new humorous adventure; and fully enamoured of the
thought that “time goes merry when the heart is young.” Likewise, equally
determined to keep her thought from anticipating the time when the heart
grows old.

Although the daughter of a genteel, respected Baptist minister, Lizzie
gave no evidence of possessing a single trait resembling dignity,
discretion, docility, or any other element reflecting the reputed
influence of the holy church, or the divinity of mortal man.

She earned her livelihood as a maid of any task, wherever chance might
lead her. And however onerous the duties imposed upon her, she seldom
failed to transliterate into vocal records of lasting mirth the nature of
any experience.

Chester Frackshun was a tall, gaunt, pecan-faced young man; with a
high-pitched voice and mincing manners. By a strange whim of inconsistent
Fate, Lizzie was endowed with every masculine characteristic that Chester
lacked; and Chester possessed many of the feminine traits that Lizzie
could never hope to assume. These discrepancies, it would seem, welded
the unusual bond of friendship existing between them. Chester depended on
Lizzie with a feeling of childish trust; knowing that she would champion
his weakness and timidity. And Lizzie was devoted to him because he
relied on her protection, and because he amused her, and understood her
humor as well.

Chester usually worked as cook on the passenger boats running across
Lake Pontchartrain, up the Amite river, from New Orleans to the French
Settlement. Lizzie had made a number of trips with him, working as
chambermaid, getting small pay but having a “good time an’ plenny fun
laughin’ at de Cajuns.”

Sometimes Chester would take a position as cook with a large family in
the city; and frequently managed to have Lizzie with him, doing odd
jobs and making the time pass merrily while it lasted. They shared many
humorous experiences, and their retelling of them was always a feature of
any gathering where they happened to be present.




Lizzie was dressed in a severely plain gray woolen dress, the
tight-fitting basque spanning her uncorseted luxuriance like a huge
bandage about to give way under the pressure. Her head was bare, and
her hair arranged in innumerable little plaits wound with shoestrings.
Chester wore a stiff-bosomed pink shirt, with a celluloid collar; an
ill-fitting piqué vest, frayed and yellow with age; and a purple cravat
decorated with a splendid blue glass ball, which declared itself a lady’s
hatpin rescued to serve a more eccentric purpose. His clothes were of a
light blue shade; and his shoes, orange yellow.

As they came into the room, Lizzie began singing lustily:

    “Tell your mother to hold her tongue,
    She had a feller w’en she was young....”

Stopping abruptly, she called out:

“Hi! good cittazun niggers. W’at y’all doin’ up in hyuh? How you do,
Aun’ Susan? Hi! old compair Tom. Good evenin’ evvybody.—An’ you too, ole
roustabout Gussie.”

Chester stood silent, grinning and bowing to everybody.

“Gal, stop yo’ racket,” Susan said, going over to her and speaking
quietly. “Don’t you see somebody sleepin’? W’at ailin’ you? You bin had
somh’n to drink comin’ ’long de road?”

“Who?” Lizzie echoed, unmindful of Susan’s admonition. “Lizzie ain’ seen
nothin’ but gutter water ’long de road, Sis’ Susan; an’ you know Lizzie
too well-raise’ to tackle dat.”

“Chester, how you do?” Scilla coquetted, trying to embarrass him. “You
sho look sweet.”

“Chester do alright w’en he let alone,” Lizzie answered quickly. “But
de boy bin complainin’ he delicate an’ healt’y, an’ you know we comed a
long way to make visit wid y’all dis evenin’; an’ we kind o’ dry roun’ de
th’oat. An’ Sis’ Susan you could’n’ len’ Chester a bucket an’ leave him
go yonder to Mr. Camille sto’ an’ git some col’ stimmalashun, so we kin
drink to each-another healt’; could you?”

“You ain’ on no steamboat ’munks deck-hans, Lizzie,” Susan replied with
sharp sarcasm. “An’ you know good I ain’ ’low no drinkin’ up in my house,
either.”

“O ’scuse me, Miss Smiley,” Lizzie apologized, affecting a grandiloquent
air. “I sho did forgot you was sanctify.”

Tom moved impatiently in his chair, saying:

“Gal, set down, an’ drink some coffee, an’ stop yo’ dev’lish ramblin’.”

“Coffee ain’ sattafyin’ to de stummic, Mr. Tom”; Chester’s mild falsetto
made timely comment, “’specially w’en you bin used to lickers mo’
nur’-shin’.... You goin’ drink coffee, Lizzie?” He asked her wonderingly.

“Boy, set down, an’ don’ show people how ignun you is,” Lizzie answered,
scowling playfully and pretending to be greatly annoyed. “Don’t you know
’tain manners an’ behayviah to scawn de of’rins o’ de house?... Bow yo’
head an’ tip yo’ hat to Miss Smiley coffee. An’ w’en we git yonder to
Gritny, den you kin say thang Gawd to dat cup o’ limmon gin in Mr. Cholly
Groos bar-room.”

Chester sat down obediently, everybody laughing heartily at the amusing
by-play.

Going over to the fire, Lizzie sat down on the floor near Tom’s chair;
took off her shoes and spread out her feet to warm them before the
pleasant blaze. As she settled into a comfortable position, she heard
several grunts of surprise from the women. Gazing at the fire, she said
with delightful unconcern:

“I know I’m simple; but I sho likes to make myself at home, whah-ever
I goes.... An’ dese pair o’ feets Lizzie got, cert’ny is tired; all de
walkin’ me an’ Chester bin doin’ yistiddy an’ today.”

“W’at walkin’ you an’ Chester got to do?... You ain’ workin’?” Came the
chorus of inquiry.

“Workin’?” Lizzie echoed, looking around from one to the other. “I know
I ain’ bin play’n.... An’ dem nasty heroes sho ain’ goin’ think Lizzie
play’n, if ever I ketch up wid ’um close enough to lay my han’s on ’um,
an’ leave my passion run reckless.... Who?... Dey sho will call it
workin’, w’en Lizzie commence workin’ on ’um.”

“Chester, w’at ail Lizzie?” Gussie asked. “She talkin’ out her right
min’, ain’t she?”

“Lizzie got her good sense,” Chester answered. “She know w’at she sayin’.
An’ she ain’ fraid to tell you, if you wan’ know.”

Acting as spokesman for the assembly, Nat said:

“Be still, evvybody.... Now go ’head, gal, an’ speak yo’ testament.”

Lizzie inquired cautiously:

“But how many settin’ in dis room goin’ be witness Lizzie done right if
dey go to put Lizzie in jail?”

“Great-day-in-de-mawnin’!” Nat exclaimed. “You ain’ kilt nobody, is you?”

“I ain’ mean to kill nobody, Unc’ Nat,” she assured him. “All Lizzie wan’
do, is wreck de nasty heroes so dey own fam’ly won’ recanize ’um; da’s
all.”

“Gal, stop makin’ riddles, an’ talk plain, for Gawd sake,” Susan said,
impatient to learn the scandal. “Who you talkin’ ’bout, any way?”

“Ain’t y’all hyeah’d w’at dey done to Chester las’ Saddy night, w’en
he was comin’ home from ole Aun’ Critty Briscoe wake, yonder to my Pa
church?”

“Who?... Done w’at?... Tell it.” They prevailed upon her with eager
curiosity.

“Ain’ found out yet,” Lizzie informed them, with growing enthusiasm.
“But Gawd ain’ goin’ leave me miss ’um. Da’s de main reason I’m goin’ to
church wid Chester tonight w’en we leave hyuh.... So I kin follow behin’
an’ lay ’um out, if dey start any humbug like las’ week.”

“But you ain’ tol’ yet anything ’bout w’at dey did,” Gussie said to her
casually.

Somewhat indifferently she remarked:

“Some y’all kin laugh, if you like, ’bout w’at dey done to Chester.” Then
with a look of suspicion towards Gussie: “An’ some yuther ones better
think on w’at dey hyeah me tell I’m goin’ do, if I ketch ’um dead to
rights.”

Frowning sullenly, Gussie asked her:

“W’at make you gotta look at me so crittacul? I bin had any traffic wid
Chester, you wan’ th’ow suspicion on me ’bout w’at was did to ’im?”

“Chester,” Lizzie called to him peremptorily, “ain’t you said you could
see in de moonlight plain, dey was’n all dark-skin mens w’at meddled
you an’ pulled off yo’ clo’se, an’ sont you runnin’ thoo de street wid
nothin’ on but yo’ undershirt?”

“Sho did,” Chester answered firmly. “Dey had one de mens sho did look
bright-skin to me.”

“Whah all dis thing took place?” Felo asked, laughing.

“Right down on de Morgan railroad, jes befo’ you git to de pastur,”
Chester answered. “I was goin’ along, singin’ to myself; ain’ stud’in
’bout nobody; w’en all at once, three or fo’ mens spring out de bushes,
an’ say to me: ‘Pull off dat lady undershirt you got on, ole Betsy!’ ...
An’ befo’ I had time to cunsider w’at was goin’ happen, dey had grab hold
o’ me, an’ pulled off my clo’se befo’ I knowed it.

“I commence strug’lin’ wid ’um to git loose; an’ I bit at ’um an’
hollered so loud, till dey had to lemme go. Den I broke out runnin’, an’
ain’ stop till I got home.... An’ ain’ had a Gawd’s blessed piece o’
clo’se on but a thin undershirt.”

“A lady undershirt?” Carmelite asked, hesitatingly.

“W’at business you got to know?” Lizzie demanded, speaking with growing
excitement. “It make any diffunce to anybody if Chester feel like he wan’
put on a lady undershirt? Dat ain’ give people no right to meddle Chester
on de high road, an’ ’zamine his body to see w’at kind o’ und’-clo’se de
boy got on.... But wait till Lizzie ketch up wid ’um! Jes’ wait.... Y’all
_sho_ goin’ see how Lizzie goin’ ’zamine de nasty Hellians, once she got
her two han’s on ’um! Who?... None y’all ain’ never seen Lizzie Cole w’en
her passion done struck her powerful!”

“Cha-cha-cha, Lizzie,” Susan said contemptuously, “stop yo’ tongue from
runnin’ so fas’. You know guinea-hens kin make a loud racket w’en dey be
in de weeds, off to dey-self.”

“Who? Aun’ Susan,” she answered quickly, “You ain’ think Lizzie talkin’
random to make y’all laugh, is you? You know I ain’ never bin had no
chillun, an’ all my strank is my own.... An’ I promise my Gawd to sho do
my bes’ an’ a li’l mo’, w’en de time come for me to take my sattafaction.”

Squinting his eyes humorously, Nat asked:

“You mus’ be think’ you Goliah, ain’t you?”

“Strank ain’ de onlies’ thing Lizzie countin’ on, Unc’ Nat,” she assured
him. “You know it don’ take no time to stick a needle in somebody nabel
w’en you wan’ do ’way wid ’um.”

This statement was greeted with general laughter, during which Lizzie’s
expression was one of serious amazement. As soon as their laughter and
playful comment subsided, she continued:

“I ain’ makin’ up nothin’ out my ’maginashun. W’at I’m say’n is natchal
fac’s. You pass a needle thoo somebody nabel, an’ tain nobody but _Gawd_
kin tell w’at dey died from.”

“An’ you expec’ we-all to b’lieve a tale like dat?” Felo asked with
disdain.

“Y’all know how Unc’ Peesah died sudden las’ New Yeahs,” Chester
announced solemnly. “But you ain’ never hyeah’d w’at kilt ’im, is you?”

“Colic; so dey tell me”; Soongy answered, “from eatin’ too much
buttermilk an’ cucumber sallit befo’ he went to bed.”

“Whah Unc’ Peesah could git cucumbers in Jannawerry?” Nat demanded.
“Don’t you re’lize w’at you say’n ain’ sinetiffic?”

“You sho right, Unc’ Nat,” Chester concurred. “Colic ain’ had a thing
to do wid it. ’Twas a fatal needle sont Unc’ Peesah ’way from hyuh. An’
nobody don’ know it better’n me.”

“Lawd, Chester!” Nookie exclaimed in surprise. “W’at hidden myst’ry dis
is you done got mixed up in? Lemme hyeah you tell ’bout it.”

“Chester,” Lizzie called to him abruptly, “pass yo’ han’ ’cross yo’ mouf
an’ wipe it dry.... You know, dey got mo’ ways o’ spreadin’ de news
besides puttin’ it in de newspaper.... Wipe yo’ mouf, boy, an’ say no
mo’.”

For a few moments there was a general silence, all eyes fixed upon
Chester expectantly. Presently Gussie spoke:

“Lizzie, w’at make you wan’ control Chester an’ keep de boy from talkin’?”

“’Cause talkin’ is ketchin’,” Lizzie answered. “An’ some people got a
reckless way o’ speakin’ dey words twice an’ makin’ ’um diffunt. So you
gotta watch out an’ keep from tellin’ too much. An’ any way, de boy done
wiped his lips; an’ me an’ Chester jus’ ’bout ready to fix we-all mouf
for some o’ Sis’ Susan gumbo, befo’ we start out for church, yonder to
Gritny.”

Getting up from the floor, she shook herself like a hen emerging from a
dust bath, kicked her shoes aside, and called out with energy:

“Come on, Sis’ Smiley, lemme help you fix de plates. Dey got two hongry
niggers hyuh kin outeat a mul’tude o’ Izzalites.” Then looking at
Chester, she said to him boisterously: “Boy, drap yo’ ole long self over
to dis side de table an’ try’n’ look like you got a intrus’ in de things
goin’ on!... You ain’ never heah’d tell ’bout gumbo befo’?”

Chester simpered good-naturedly and took a seat at the table. When the
gumbo was served, Lizzie sat down alongside of him and they began eating.
Dink’s whimpering music was heard over in the corner of the room, waking
like a timely invitation, and several members began humming softly.

Gussie, eager for conversation, was about to speak; when Nat, preferring
to have no irrelevant distraction, held up his hands for silence, rolling
his eyes ominously. Gussie obeyed the sign, and the humming flowed on
uninterrupted. By degrees it gathered volume, sustained and fervent;
every one surrendering unconsciously to the ingratiating lilt of the
pulsing melody.

Tom sat humming with his hands to his head, his elbows resting on his
knees. Susan was sitting opposite, swaying to and fro in rhythmic
contemplation. Nat sat upright with his head resting against the back of
his chair, his brawny hands clasping the chair legs. Uncle Foteen sat
with his eyes closed, every now and then intoning a low “A-men.” The
women accentuated the rhythm as they hummed, with a gentle patting of
the feet. And Felo’s spasmodic interpolation of a picturesque word or a
fragmentary line from the song proper, added rare charm to the fleeting
tuneful moments.

Lizzie and Chester were eating with evident enjoyment, apparently
interested in the obligato of voices. Having finished her gumbo, Lizzie
leaned back in her chair, and in a spirit of careless mischief began
singing lustily the old street song,

    “Mama got a baby called “Ti-nah-nah-’nah
      ’Ti-nah-nah ’nah, ’nah....”

Felo’s loud reprimand brought her song to an abrupt close. Glowering with
indignation, he called to her:

“Gal, git out o’ hyuh wid yo’ strumpet ways! W’at you take dis place to
be, anyhow? You better go out yonder on de road, an’ play wid yo’ kind,
if you can’ ack right w’en you git ’munks people w’at know how to be
decen’.”

“But no, Mr. Felo,” Lizzie answered with genuine surprise. “You ain’ mean
to call me out my name like dat, is you?”

“W’at you is, if you ain’ a strumpet?” Felo asked with vehemence.
“I ain’ hesitate to call you a _double_ strumpet; reckless as you
is;—on-cuncernin’ of you bein’ a preacher daughter, an’ plenny ole enough
to know better.”

Foreseeing an altercation, Susan interposed.

“Look!” She called to Lizzie. “Ain’t you say you an’ Chester was goin’ to
church yonder to Gritny?”

Lizzie looked at Susan without replying. Going over to her, Susan took
her by the arm, saying:

“If you _is_ goin’, den y’all two better start befo’ it git too late.”
Then turning to Felo, she said: “Felo, go yonder in de side yard an’
fetch me a pitcher o’ cistun water.”

As Felo left the room, Lizzie muttered:

“Good thing I ain’ let my tongue cut loose an’ say evvything my min’ tol’
me to say to dat ole rusty w’ite-folks nigger.... It mus’ bin Gawd tol’
you sen’ him out de room. Sis’ Susan.”

Shaking her head and smiling pleasantly, Susan said:

“An’ Gawd expec’in you to go ’way from hyuh befo’ Felo git back. So don’
was’e time talkin’, but go ’long ... Chester, yonder yo’ hat. Take Lizzie
wid you to de New Hope church an’ see ’f you can’ make her pray. Go
’long, now, bofe of you; an’ no hard feelin’s.”

Fully aware of Susan’s positive character, and feeling convinced that
further argument was useless, Lizzie made ready to leave with silent
magnanimity. She walked over to the fireplace proudly, saying with a
haughty air:

“Chester, pay Miss Smiley de change comin’ to her, till I put on my
shoes.”

Chester settled the account, and they walked towards the front door.

“Good-night to y’all fellow-Chrishtuns,” Lizzie said with spurious
geniality. “An’ much oblige’ for yo’ manners an’ behavior.”

Just as she finished her lofty farewell, Felo came in from the back room.

“Da’s right, Lizzie”; he said to her, “don’ go ’way from hyuh wid yo’
feelin’s upset ’bout somh’n was said to you. Good-night to you; an’ Gawd
go wid you.”

“Go to Hell!” She told him; pushing Chester through the open door and
slamming it after her.




The road which Lizzie and Chester had to take from Susan’s cook shop down
to church in the village, was a lonely, desolate stretch of about two
miles. The few homes along the river front were poor, depleted reminders
of old plantation days, few and far between, and setting far back from
the road. If one took the railroad track running parallel with the high
levee, unless the moon was shining, there was no other light to show the
way but the clear glimmer of the stars; provided there was no mist in
the sky or dripping fog creeping along the land. If one took the path on
the top of the levee, the reflection from the electric lights on the New
Orleans’ side of the river helped to point out the puddles and uneven
places, and the vagrant cows that selected the grassy prominence for
their somnolent ruminating.

After a while one came to the cotton seed oil mills with their spreading
wharves built over the water, and the numerous electric lights and
occasional patrolling nightwatchman offered a certain sense of
protection. But it was not until one had passed through the long aisles
of cotton seed in sacks, and bales of lint piled to a great height and
covered with suspicious-looking tarpaulins, from under which imaginary
ruffians might spring unawares, that a wholesome feeling of courage
came to one before entering the village. Then, there was Mr. Cholly
Groos’s bar-room, just at the edge of the town; and the thought of his
inspiriting lemon-gin always made one “step light an’ ready to face the
devil.”

Having traipsed the lonely distance with little or no conversation
between them, Lizzie at length proposed going to Mr. Cholly’s for a
comforting cup before proceeding to her father’s church at the back
of the town. Chester was agreeable and they hurried forward, talking
pleasantly.

“Chester, you got any money?” She asked him.

“W’at you wan’ know for?”

“Well, I jus’ wan’ know sho if you got money. ’Cause I don’ care if I get
good an’ drunk tonight; ole Felo done got me feelin’ so upset,—callin’ me
out my name like he did, yonder befo’ all dem people.”

“W’at good gittin’ drunk goin’ do you?” Chester asked reprovingly.
“’Tain’ goin’ hurt Felo none, is it?”

“Nasty, scawnful, w’ite-folks nigger,” she muttered with deep contempt.
“I ain’ goin’ leave myself res’ till I git even wid ’im.... You watch me.”

“Ain’ Felo a member de New Hope church?” Chester insinuated with
artful meaning. “Felo over hyuh evvy Sunday night; an’ dey ain’ got no
under-groun’ workers kin tell you somh’n ’bout Felo tracks?”

“Boy, you sho got a good head,” Lizzie answered. “Stay wid me; an’ no
matter w’at happen, ’twon’ be nobody but Chester an’ Lizzie.... W’at you
say?”

“Gawd grant it,” he answered. And laughing merrily, they walked on
towards the glimmering light from the bar-room door, a welcome beacon at
the head of the street.

They soon reached the place, and as Lizzie entered, followed by Chester,
she called out gaily:

“Two big cups o’ limmon-gin, Mr. Cholly. An’ po’ ’um out heavy; ’cause me
an’ Chester feelin’ kind o’ weak an’ puny dis evenin’.”

Across the room several men were playing cards. Recognizing Lizzie, one
of them said to her:

“How come you don’ stop play’n wid Chester, an’ git you a sho-nuf man
w’at kin give you a good time, an’ show you somh’n natchal befo’ ole age
come creepin’ up on you?” Lizzie stopped drinking, and glaring at him
angrily, she answered with clinched teeth:

“Good thing Mr. Cholly stannin’ hyuh, ole nigger. ’Cause I sho would
tell you somh’n mo’ besides ‘damn yo’ nasty soul an’ go to Hell.’” After
which, she gulped the remainder of her lemon-gin and stalked out of the
room, leaving Chester to take care of the payment.

She waited for him outside, and when he came to her, they started off
together. As they walked along, the awkward silence was broken now and
then by Chester’s subdued humming. Lizzie appeared to be occupied with
some burdening thought.

At last they reached the church door. The place was quite crowded and the
members were singing lustily. Lizzie recognized the funeral hymn, which
caused her some surprise. As they entered, a young woman named Lethe
greeted them, and Lizzie asked her:

“Who dead, Lethe? I ain’ know dey had any wake to-night.”

“One ole lady dey calls Aun’ Milly,” Lethe informed her. “Sis’ Amy
Hollan’ Ma. Come fum Peach Awchud, yonder to Bayou Bah-tah-yuh.”

“W’en de ole lady died?” Lizzie asked.

“Gawd knows, Lizzie,” she went on, “I ain’ never got de straight ’bout
de thing. You know, Aun’ Amy bin drunk for mos’ a week, an’ nobody ain’
bin able to git de right news fum ’uh.”

“An’ dey bring de ole lady all de way from Peach Awchud hyuh, to sing
ove’ ’uh?” Lizzie asked, half-playfully.

“Lizzie, don’ ply me wid a whole lot o’ queshtun I ain’ able to answer.
All I know, I’m goin’ tell you, if you wan’ lissen.”

“Come set hyuh an’ talk ’bout it,” Chester suggested, leading them to a
bench in the corner and sitting down. “Now, go ’head.”

“Well, you know,” Lethe began again, “me an’ my brether Booguloo took
a skiff soon dis mawnin’, an’ went down Harvey Cunnal to see my cousin
Dootsy, cookin’ yonder at de camp for dem mens pickin’ moss to Li’l
Coquille bayou.”

“How much a pound dey gits for black moss, Lethe?” inquired Chester,
interrupting her story.

“Boy, shet yo’ mouf!” Lizzie commanded sharply. “Lethe ain’ talkin’ ’bout
sellin’ no moss. She talkin’ ’bout de ole lady call Aun’ Milly,—layin’
yonder ’ceasded. (Deceased.) Don’t you hyeah ’um singin’ ove’ ’uh? Shet
up, an’ lissen.”

Seeing Chester offer no argument to Lizzie’s rebuke, Lethe resumed her
story.

“Well, like I was goin’ say: me an’ Booguloo was helpin’ my cousin
Dootsy spread de green moss in de sun to dry on de bushes growin’ on
de side de cunnal bank; w’en w’at we seen comin’ roun’ de ben’ up de
cunnal, but a skiff cov’ud over wid a muskeeter-bar up on cane reed
poles, lookin’ like a natchal bed floatin’ on de water; an’ wavin’ up an’
down,—shinin’ in de sun like a cream-color flag.

“Booguloo say: ‘But w’at dis thing is?... Somebody ain’ use’ to
muskeeters, an’ gotta ride in big daylight, settin’ up und’ a muskeeter
net?... Dis ain’ no cheap people. Dis mus’ be qual’ty folks.’

“I say: Maybe somebody sick, an’ dey bin took ’um to de doctor, yonder to
Gritny. You know muskeeter-bite bad for de fever; so maybe da’s w’at make
dey put up de muskeeter net.

“Bime-by de skiff come a li’l closer, an’ we seen dey had a ole cullud
man pullin’; an’ a big fat dark-skin ooman settin’ on de back seat.

“I say: Booguloo, ain’ da’s Aun’ Amy Hollan settin’ up in de skiff?

“Booguloo give a good look, an’ he say: ‘Sho is, Lethe. Da’s Aun’ Amy
own-self. An’ I bet she drunk as a policeman on Mahdi Gras day!’

“An’ Booguloo was right, too. ’Cause w’en de skiff come close enough for
us to call to Aun’ Amy, she look like somebody simple; an’ she could
hardly talk.

“I say: Aun’ Amy, you mus’ bin heard de muskeeters was bad out hyuh soon
in de mawnin’, ain’t you?

“She look at me like somebody jus’ woke up, an’ she say: ‘Da’s w’at de
tell me.’ Talkin’ slow, like her tongue mos’ pah’lize.

“Booguloo say. ‘Aun’ Amy, whah you goin’ so soon in de mawnin’?’

“She say: ‘To fetch my Ma; yonder to Peach Awchud.’

“I say: Aun’ Amy, she ain’ sick, is she?

“She say: ‘Da’s w’at dey tell me.’

“Booguloo say: ‘She ain’ dead, is she?’

“Aun’ Amy say: ‘Da’s w’at dey tell me.’

“I say: W’en she died, yistiddy?

“She say: Da’s w’at dey tell me.’

“I say: An’ dey goin’ take ’uh all de way to Gritny to wake ’uh, an’ have
de berrin’?

“She say: ‘Da’s w’at dey tell me.’

“Booguloo say: ‘Look Mister; go ’head wid yo’ skiff. Hurry up an’
pull Aun’ Amy yonder to Peach Awchud, an’ leave ’uh learn somh’n mo’
concernin’ w’at dey goin’ do wid ’uh Ma. ’Cause she ain’ look like she
know _nothin’_ ’bout de po’ ole soul.’

“So dah whah de skiff went on down de bayou. An’ I ain’ know nothin’
futher, till I got hyuh to de church dis evenin’, an’ foun’ all de
members singin’ ove’ Aun’ Milly.”

The amusing recital furnished Lizzie with keen enjoyment and she was
laughing heartily. When Lethe had finished, Chester asked her:

“But how dey got de ole lady way from Peach Awchud so quick? Peach Awchud
mo’n eighteen miles down the bayou. How dey brought ’uh up?”

“Dey fetched ’uh up in de skiff, rolled up in a blanket; wid Aun’ Amy
settin’ on de back seat und’ de muskeeter net, speechless drunk, like she
was w’en me an’ Booguloo seen ’uh dis mawnin’. An’ ’uh oldes’ daughter,
Frozine, was waitin’ at de head o’ de cunnal wid Mr. Antoine groc’ry
wagon; an’ dey brung ’uh straight hyuh to de church ’bout two hours ago.”

“Whah dey lef’ Aim’ Amy?” Lizzie asked.

“She settin’ up yonder on de front row, pah’lize drunk, try’n to sing.
An’ nobody can’ get de po’ soul to budge.”

“Aun’ Amy mus’ be got a flas’ hide somewhah in ’uh pocket,” ventured
Chester. “She still drunk from soon dis mawnin’ till now.”

“Mus’ be,” agreed Lethe. “Sis’ Fanny an’ Frozine bin try’n to git Aun’
Amy home to ’uh house, to drink some strong coffee, but she keep on
say’n, talkin’ like somebody goin’ sing:

    “Go ’way, Sis’ Fanny,
    An’ lemme be.
    I’m de onles daughter my ole Ma had,
    An’ I’m jew to stay hyuh wid ’uh an’ sing.”

“Den w’en Frozine try to coax ’uh home, she say, jes’ like she singin’:

    “Go ’way, chile, an’ lemme be.
    I’m po’ Aun’ Milly onles daughter,
    An’ she call me to come,
    But I went too late.
    She call me to hurry,
    But de boat was slow;
    An’ w’en I got to de bed-side,
    Aun’ Milly was gone.”

“Sis’ Fanny keep on say’n to ’uh: ‘Da’s alright, Sis’ Amy; yo’ Ma ain’
goin’ be lef’ alone. Come go home wid me, an’ drink some strong coffee to
bring yo’ strank back, an’ you goin’ feel better.’”

“But Aun’ Amy say:

    “Who goin’ sing ove’ po’ Aun’ Milly
    W’en Amy gone away?

    Lemme be, Sis’ Fanny;
    I’m de onles daughter,
    An’ I gotta stay hyuh
    An’ watch dis evenin’,
    An’ sing Aun’ Milly
    A long farewell.”

“It soun’ like it oughta be pitiful,” said Lizzie, with a light laugh.
“But it sho goin’ start me gig’lin’, if I go in yonder whah Aun’ Amy
settin’, an’ lissen at w’at she say’n. So set hyuh wid me, Lethe, an’
leave us talk till we feels like joinin’ wid de singin’.”

Chester got up to go. “Well, y’all kin set hyuh long as you please,” he
said, “but I’m goin’ up yonder in front to view Aun’ Amy an’ watch w’at
goin’ on. Look for me, Lizzie, w’en you git ready to go.”

Left to themselves, now came the time for comment and confidences.
Lethe was a notorious gossip, and Lizzie, being an omnivorous listener,
there was little need to fear a moment of monotony during the time they
were together. Not a member present escaped criticism or ridicule;
Lizzie’s keen enjoyment helping to encourage Lethe’s loquacious humor.
And when her knowledge of the doings and sayings of her colored friends
was exhausted, she was able to recount any number of ludicrous stories
about “de w’ite-folks”; irrespective of their station; whether they were
“nothin’ but parties an’ parties wid no fam’ly o’ people,” or “p’yo
w’ite-folks wid high-up connection.”

Desiring a share of the honor of entertaining, Lizzie told some of her
amusing adventures on the steamboat when along with Chester; of her
visit to Susan’s cook shop that evening, and her unpleasant encounter
with Felo; which account she embroidered elaborately for the better
satisfaction of the amazed Lethe, whom she soon discovered to be Felo’s
particular friend.

“An’ you say you lef’ Felo yonder to Susan cook shop?” Lethe asked with
curious interest.

“Lef’ him yonder eatin’ an’ drinkin’, wid Scilla an’ Soongy an’ Carm’lite
an’ Nookie, an’ Unc’ Nat an’ some yuther mens,” Lizzie informed her. “An’
maybe dey got a heap mo’ wimmins by now, ’cause you know I’m bin gone
from yonder a good w’ile.”

This was unwelcome news to Lethe. Her forehead settled into a deep frown,
and gazing into space, she thought aloud:

“An’ de ole smooth-tongue hypocrite goin’ come home long aft’ hours
tonight, w’en I be in bed, an’ goin’ say he jus’ come from Mr. Amos
house, ’cross de river.... But wait;—I’m goin’ fix him dis blessed night
o’ my Lawd, sho as I’m bawn.”

Looking at her in wonderment, Lizzie asked:

“W’at you mean, Lethe? You goin’ to Sis’ Fanny house an’ wait till Felo
come home?”

“Wa’t you think goin’ take me to Sis’ Fanny house, w’en I got a good
house o’ my own?” she returned, with a show of impatience.

“Den how you goin’ see Felo aft’ you done gone to bed?”

“Lizzie, ain’t you know Felo bin stay’n wid me to my house evvy Sunday
night for a long time? You ain’ think Felo come all de way clean ’cross
de river jes’ to go to de New Hope church, is you?”

“I know he all time braggin’ ’bout bein’ a good Chrishtun,” Lizize said,
with cautious innocence. “But I ain’ never heayh’d ’im bring yo’ name in
de queshtun no time.”

Lethe’s mind was busy chasing after her wandering thoughts. “So da’s w’at
make him come late all de time,” she ruminated. “Goin’ yonder to Susan
cook shop. Den comin’ hyuh wid a lie in ’is mouf, ’bout Mr. Amos keepin’
’im late.”

“Mens is mens, Lethe,” Lizzie consoled her. “An’ you think Felo gotta
be diffunt from de res’ dese niggers, jes’ because he bin livin’ to Mr.
Amos house so long an’ know somh’n ’bout w’ite-folks ways?.... Who? It
sho goin’ take a better man den ole ’ceitful Felo to keep me from havin’
my pleasure, w’en de worl’ so big an’ handy to play ’roun’ in.... Git
up from hyuh, Lethe; an’ rub dem wrinkles out yo’ face, an’ leave us go
up yonder an’ sing ove’ Aun’ Milly.... Come on. Dey done start “Po’ Li’l
Jesus,” an’ ’twon’ be long befo’ de whole buildin’ be rockin’.... Come
on, lessus go.”

Lethe looked at her dejectedly. “Go ’head, an’ sing much as you please,”
she said, “I’m goin’ home.”

And as Lizzie left her, she walked out.




However inconsistent Felo’s ideas of theology might appear, there were
three important purposes he endeavored to live up to with a sincerity
that became him nobly. Three purposes he took great pleasure in making
known at all times: “To hol’ a high head an’ keep a good name ’munks de
cullud folks”; “to stick close to Mr. Amos, and look aft’ his welfare
long’s he staid single”; and, “to hol’ cov’nan wid Gawd an’ serve Jesus
long as I got my good sense.”

The first of these, interpreted by many of his unsympathetic friends as
a sort of unseemly arrogance, which they called his “biggidy ways,” won
for him the name of “w’ite-folks nigger.” While the second brought him
the assurance of a permanent home, and fixed his standing as a member of
the household, a sort of heir by annexation;—“joint arran’ de fam’ly,” as
he called it. As he and Mr. Amos had been playmates from early childhood,
his connection in reality was more like that of a faithful friend, than
the position of a common servant without rights and privileges. And to
keep faith with Mr. Amos and hold his confidence and lasting respect, was
next to keeping his covenant with God.

When he came back to work the day after his visit to Susan’s cook shop,
he was conscious of something having happened which might shake this
feeling of trust; and the burdening thought troubled him sorely. Try as
he would, he was unable to free himself of the haunting fact or invent a
reasonable excuse to explain his somber mood, which he was certain would
not escape Mr. Amos’s attention. Song, at all times an easy means for
expressing the gladness or turbulence of his emotional soul, now deserted
him completely. And when he tried to pray, his mind went groping about in
a wilderness of mist and fog, unable to find a word or thought that would
bring him any spiritual relief.

To elude Mr. Amos was out of the question; because it was an understood
custom, that Felo must sit across the room and talk while Mr. Amos ate;
giving a detailed account of his week-end trip across the river, with the
doings and sayings of his colored friends, most of whom Mr. Amos knew
from early childhood. It was always a delightful conference, and Mr. Amos
encouraged it with genuine interest.

A quiet evening spent at home alone with Felo, he declared, was sure
to be an evening of picturesque thought and spontaneous, refreshing
entertainment. Because humble Felo had more to offer in the way of
colorful, living literature, than one could ever expect to find at the
colorless teas and elaborate dinner parties of many pseudo-literary white
friends.




As Mr. Amos sat down to eat, Felo took his accustomed chair on the
opposite side of the room near the door leading to the kitchen, where he
would be in readiness during the progress of the meal. He sat quietly,
his gaze fixed on the floor rug, staring into infinitude; his arms
hanging aimlessly by the sides of his chair.

In the center of the table was a shallow dark green bowl filled with
dainty, pink wild mimosa blossoms; the unusual color combination together
with the acquisition of the rare little flowers, causing Mr. Amos to
wonder in silent admiration. After a while he said to Felo:

“Were did you get the lovely ‘touch-me-nots,’ so late in the season?”

“Yonder in Gritny,” came the reply; slow and apathetic.

“From your mother’s garden?”

“Ma ain’ got no time to play wid no garden; wid all dem chillun an’ dat
hog she got to look to.”

“Then I suppose you bought them?” Mr. Amos persisted.

“Who goin’ buy tetch-me-not flow’rs, w’en dey got ’um growin’ wil’ like
grass, all up an’ down de railroad track?”

“Well,” said Mr. Amos, “wherever they came from, they’re very lovely; and
I suppose I must thank you for bringing them to me.”

Felo made no reply, but sat looking at the floor vacantly. His silence
was unusual and Mr. Amos wondered at it. Felo was always ready for
conversation. Was there anything the matter, Mr. Amos asked him.

After a slight hesitation, he answered in a subdued tone:

“Man, eat yo’ li’l foods, an’ don’ worry ’bout me.”

Wondering at the polite indifference, Mr. Amos asked:

“What ails you, Felo, are you ill?”

Folding his arms slowly, he leaned forward on his knees and looked away
from Mr. Amos as he spoke:

“Man, eat yo’ foods, for Gawd sake; an’ don’ ask so many inquis’tun
queshtun. Git thoo so I kin wash dese dishes an’ go yonder to my room.”

“What’s the matter with you tonight?” Mr. Amos asked with a show of
impatience. “Are you sick? Are you tired? Anything the matter at home?”

“Man, don’ plague me,” he answered appealingly. “Be still an’ don’ worry
me. Do I look like anybody sick?”

“You look about as healthy as somebody dead and buried,” Mr. Amos
answered, smiling playfully. “What happened to you that you look so
forlorn and friendless?”

Attempting a bravado manner, he said:

“Nobody but de devil sont you hyuh to plague me tonight. My feelin’s is
my feelin’s; an’ nothin’ ain’ goin’ change ’um. So ’tain no use talkin’
an’ try’n tell w’at make ’um so.”

“Alright, deacon,” Mr. Amos answered, with an air of feigned
indifference. “If you think there’s nothing I can do to help you smooth
out the kinks, whatever they are, so be it.”

Felo remained silent until Mr. Amos was about to leave the room. Seeing
him start towards the stairway, he asked:

“You ain’ goin’ out tonight, is you?”

“Why do you ask?”

“Well, y’oughta stay home some time an’ git yo’ night-res’.... All time
runnin’ out in de night air an’ fros’, exposin’ yo’self like you does;
wid de win’ searchin’ ’roun yo’ ankles an’ things, an’ blowin’ ’cross yo’
body an’ keep you lookin’ so puny.”

“How about yourself?” Mr. Amos asked him. “You don’t seem to be concerned
about the night air and the wind when you go rambling about? I suppose
being a deacon of the church, you have some special arrangement with God
to temper the elements to your convenience?”

“Look. Leave dat be jes’ like it is,” he said abruptly, “I’m thinkin’
’bout who got to look aft’ you w’en you git flat o’ yo’ back an’ can’
help yo’self no mo’. ’Tain nobody but Felo got to be plague’ wid you.
Da’s de one thing make me cuncern yonder wid de future.... But de main
thing I ax you,—befo’ you commence all dis heavy comasation,—is you goin’
out tonight?”

“Why do you want to know?”

“Well, w’en I git thoo in de kitchen, I wan’ talk wid you confidenshun.”

Mr. Amos laughed good-naturedly, saying to him:

“I’ll be upstairs, ready to listen to your tale of rape or robbery,
whichever it might be. But come with a different face than the one you
wear now. I don’t want to have bad dreams tonight.”

With a heroic attempt to smile, he answered, as Mr. Amos walked away:

“Go ’head upstairs, for Gawd sake. You all time ready to play too much.”

After finishing all his chores in the kitchen, Felo went through the
house, seeing that all the windows and doors were fastened, before he
went upstairs. Going into the room where Mr. Amos was, he found him lying
on the bed reading, with the cat asleep on his chest. The cat, like Mr.
Amos, was one of Felo’s constant worries. He didn’t know which one of
them was “de wusser.” It was a splendid excuse for him to expostulate.

“Y’awter put dat ole cat out-doahs. All two of you keep dis place lookin’
like a fatal rabbit-nes’, de way yo’ hair be fallin’ ove’ evvything.
I kin shake dem blankets till my two arms be stiff, an’ de hair yet
hanging’ to ’um. An’ de onles way to git y’all hair off des flo’-rugs,—I
gotta git down on my knees an’ brush ’um wid a swiss-broom.”

Mr. Amos put his book aside and laughed heartily.

“Keep on!” Felo began again. “One dese nights you goin’ see dat same cat
cut yo’ breath fum you; lay’n ’cross yo’ buzzum like dat.... An’ some
dese w’ite-folks only goin’ be too glad to say ’twan nobody but nigger
Felo did ’way wid you. An’ who you reckon goin’ be hyuh in de house to
put it on de cat, aft’ dey done spread de news?... Nobody. Da’s who.”

Mr. Amos looked at him and asked quietly:

“Did you come up here to give a lecture on the cat? Or did you say you
had something worrying you, and you wanted to talk about it?”

“I come up hyuh to look aft’ yo’ comfut,” he replied, taking a pillow
from the opposite side of the bed and making ready to arrange it under
Mr. Amos’s head.

“Hyuh; lemme slip dis pilluh und’ yo’ head; an’ leave dat ole cat slide
down further on yo’ stummic, whah ’tain so dang’us.”

This little attention performed, Felo sat down in the rocking chair and
began looking about the room, uncertain how to start his communication.
After an awkward silence, he asked:

“You goin’ keep on readin’?”

“What have you got to say?” Mr. Amos questioned, without looking away
from his book.

“Man, put yo’ book down, an’ be soshable,” he commanded. “You ain’
sattafy peepin’ up in books all day long, you gotta come hyuh at
night-time strainin’ yo’ eyesight over agin?... W’a’s de matter, you don’
wan’ talk?”

“No; I want to listen,” said Mr. Amos, closing the book and putting it
aside. “What have you to tell me?”

“I wan’ tell you ’bout a upsetment me an’ Lethe had las’ night,” he began
apologetically. “I know Lethe done blabbed it all over Gritny by now; an’
I know she goin’ tell Miss Tilly; an’ Miss Tilly sho ain’ goin’ miss tell
you soon’s she see you; so I wan’ tell you de whole thing so you know de
straight tale w’en you hyeah it fum somebody else.”

Whereupon he gave a careful account of his visit to Aunt Susan’s cook
shop; the members he met and talked with there; his misunderstanding with
Lizzie, and his late visit to the church; where he learned that Lethe
had gone home in a sullen frame of mind over some wilful misinformation
communicated to her by the vengeful Lizzie. Leaving the church with the
wake in full swing, he told how he went to Lethe’s house, to find that
she had gone to bed. He knocked on the door and she got up and let him
in; finding fault with him for coming so late; and asking why he hadn’t
spent the night with the women he began the evening with so pleasantly at
Susan’s.

“I say to ’uh: For Gawd sake, Lethe, don’ try an’ raise no humbug late
in de night like dis. I ain’ come hyuh to make no squawble over any lie
Lizzie Cole done hatched up jes’ for spite.

“I say: I come hyuh like I do evvy Sunday night; ’cause I wan’ see you,
an’ ’cause I thinks somh’n ’bout you.... So dah whah I commence to
undress myself, an’ went to bed, ’cause I was sleepy.”

“Went to bed!” Mr. Amos exclaimed in playful amazement. “In Lethe’s
house?... I didn’t know that was part of the religious obligation of a
deacon of the church on Sunday night?”

“Dah ’tis again,” Felo commented, looking thoroughly abashed. “Da’s
de main reason I ain’ nev’ wan’ tell you nothin’ seecut. You all time
wan’ twis’ things to make people look foolish.... Ain’ Lethe an’ me bin
knowin’ each-another for a long time?... Ever sence she come yonder fum
Tuckapaw Parish,—an’ oughta be un’stan’ w’at our feelin’s is by now?”

“Then I suppose Lethe is what your Bible calls a concubine. You remember
Solomon had several hundred. But you must be careful not to have more
than two or three in Gretna. The ways of the church have changed since
Solomon’s day; and a deacon in Gretna is expected to hold a high head
among his people.”

“Man, leave de Bible be; an’ quit reachin’ way back yonder in ainshen
days to git somh’n to make game o’ people, an’ call ’um out dey name
dat-a-way. Lethe alright. An’ I kin give ’uh de praise ’bove inny cullud
ooman I know w’at ain’ got no husban’.”

“Then why don’t you do the decent thing and marry her?”

“Marry who?” He asked in open-eyed amazement. “You wan’ me marry Lethe
wid de high temper she got,—an’ jealous-hearted like she is, too?... Man,
you ain’ know w’at you say’n. You gotta see Lethe in a high passion like
I seen ’uh las’ night, befo’ you fix it in yo’ min’ dat me an’ Lethe
oughta marry each-another.”

Besides, Lethe was suspicious-minded; he went on enumerating. She was
ready to believe anything anybody told her. She had a tongue that wagged
at both ends and blabbed everything she knew. It’s bad for a nigger to
be like that. But could she tell what happened without exposing herself
too? Maybe she didn’t care about her reputation. But what would the
white folks think of him when they heard it? How would he ever reinstate
himself in the church if they brought him up before the moderator to make
explanation? The elder and the deacon were supposed to be more sanctified
than common members. But maybe Lethe wouldn’t say anything after all....
But what made her listen to that lying Lizzie, and ’cuse him of having
other women? Did he ever miss one Sunday night with her since they
fixed up the understanding between them?... But that’s the way with a
jealous-hearted woman; you never know what she is going to do. And you
just got to wrassle with them when they won’t listen to reason; and leave
them to take their comings, no matter how cheap it makes you feel when
everything is over.

“De mo’ I tried to talk easy an’ persuade ’uh she was wrong,” Felo
continued, “de mo’ louder she answer back; searchin’ in ’uh min’ for
nasty names to make me shame;—an’ me lay’n up in de bed strug’lin to git
some sleep. All at once, I raise my voice an’ say to ’uh: ‘Lethe, for
Gawd sake don’ be so shameless. Try an’ shut yo’ evil-thinkin’ fly-trap
an’ lay down an’ ax Gawd to help you pray.’ She ain’ said a word; but I
seen ’uh reach over to de pot-shelf an’ grab a skillet, an’ turn ’roun
an’ commence to come ’cross de room. Dah whah I jumped out de bed, an’
was huntin’ on de flo’ for my pants, w’en she say: ‘Whah you think you
goin’?’

“I say: Lethe, I ain’ come hyuh tonight to make no brawl wid no foolish
’ooman. I’m goin’ yonder to Sis’ Fanny house whah I b’long, an’ lay down
wid a peaceful min’, an’ not be upset wid a shameless thing like you is.

“She say: ‘You goin’ home, is you?... Well, w’en you does go, I wan’ tell
you ’tain’ nobody but me an’ Gawd be witness you goin’ ’way from hyuh
cripple....’

“An’ dah whah she made at me wid de skillet, jes’ w’en I was pullin’ on
one my pants laigs. I drapped de thing on de flo’, an’ grabbed hol’ the
skillet an’ wrenched it out ’uh han’; w’en she come up at me full-fo’ce,
like she wan’ scratch my face, either butt me,—dang’us-lookin’ as
innybody you ever seen.

“I ain’ stop to consider ’bout w’at to do; but I up wid de skillet an’
plastud it ’cross ’uh face haphazzud. An’ de nex’ thing I knowed, I seen
three teeth lay’n on de flo’, knocked clean out de front ’uh mouth....

“Did I felt ’shame’?” Felo answered, slightly disconcerted by Mr. Amos’s
unexpected reproof. “Da’s another subjec’.

“De thing w’at worried me mo’n anything else, was how I could git home
all dem five long blocks ’dout anybody seein’ me, aft’ I had re’lize I
comed away widout no pants on;—slippin’ long de street in de moonlight
wid blood all ove’ my und’shirt, runnin’ de risk o’ somebody comin’ up on
me an’ takin’ me for a rogue done commit murder, befo’ day in de mawnin’.

“I knowed Lethe could take care ’uhself. An’ I knowed she had salt in de
house; so I knowed soon she had stop de bleedin’ from de mouth, she be
out o’ danger.

“So w’en I reached home an’ got in bed, I sho did wrassel wid my soul,
an’ prayed hard to fall asleep. But Gawd mus’ bin vex wid me.... ’E helt
de sleep back from me; an’ I ain’ had a single wink o’ sleep de whole
night long.

“I tried to pray, but my min’ was upset wid all kind o’ confusion.... I
ain’ never notice befo’ how cows an’ creeters an’ things could be such
plumb nuisance in de night-time. Look like I could hyeah evvy rooster in
evvybody hen-house, crowin’ an’ ’nouncin’ de crackin’ o’ day all over
Gritny. An’ w’en de win’ blowed pass de house, I could heayh de a-ko
like a mul’tude o’ dogs barkin’ an’ callin’ at one-’nother, miles futher
away.... An’ between dat hog Ma Fanny got yonder in de yard, gruntin’
an’ goin’ on; an’ Miss Barb’ra cows nex’-do, keepin’ up such a mooin’
an’ a moanin’; it look like evvything was talkin’ ’bout some kin’ o’
tribulation an’ on-res’ful cundition....

“Even de mawkin-bird singin’ in de umbrella tree ’ginse de fence, ’is
voice so loud an’ screechy, it soun’ like he findin’ fault wid de moon
for shinin’ so bright. An’ I couldn’ help wishin’ de night air make ’im
ketch de so’ th’oat; den I know he had to keep still.

“I say to myself: Dis ain’ doin’ no good; lay’n hyuh frettin’, an’ big
day already come.... Lemme git up an’ dress an’ go walk out-do’as in de
fresh air.

“So dah whah I put on my clo’se an’ went ’roun to Lethe house to see’f I
could patch up de diffunce w’at comed up between us.

“I knocked on de do’ easy, but she ain’ answer. I knocked agin a li’l
louder, an’ call to ’uh, an’ she still ain’ answer.... I say: Maybe she
gone up de street to de doctor. I say: Lemme walk ’roun a li’l piece, an’
I come back later an’ maybe she be hyuh.

“So dah whah I went up de railroad track fur as de Chinee-men’s garden;
an’ I watched ’um hoein’ an’ plantin’ till almos’ a whole hour had pass;
den I start back. I walked slow, an’ picked a bunch o’ tetch-me-nots
to bring to Lethe; growin’ so plennyful ’long-side de track, wid de
night-jew on ’um, an’ lookin’ so pink an’ nice an’ sweet-smellin’.

“I got to de house an’ it was shet tight, but smoke was comin’ out de
chimley. I say: Da’s a good sign. She home; an’ she ain’ dead.... I
knocked on de do’, but she ain’ made no answer. I listen to see’f I could
hyeah walkin’ in de room, but evvything was still. I knocked once mo’ an’
still she ain’ answer. Den I call to ’uh. I say: Lethe, dis Felo.... I’m
on my way ’cross de river, an’ I come after my pants.

“Bimeby I could hyeah stirrin’ in de room; an’ nex’ thing I seen,—de
window cracked open a li’l piece, an’ my pants fell down on de gal’ry
flo’. An’ den de window shet tight, like nobody was in de house.

“I rolled de pants up in some newspaper I got to de Dago stan’; an’
crossed on de ferry-boat, an’ come hyuh to de castle to consult wid you
’bout w’at to do.... An’ now you got de whole story.”

“And the honor of hearing it well-told by the bold hero himself,” Mr.
Amos commented, looking at him with an amused smile.

“Man, don’ laugh an’ make game dat way,” returned Felo, with quiet
appeal. “Dis thing too much like a tawment to my soul to try an’ joke
’bout it.... How you reckon I’m goin’ feel if Lethe go blab de thing all
over Gritny, an’ de members bring me up befo’ de church? ’Tain nothin’ to
play wid. Dis subjec’ is _seerus_.”

“Then you’re not concerned a bit over the loss of Lethe’s teeth, are
you?” Mr. Amos asked him.

“Lethe ain’ got to worry ’bout ’uh teeth,” Felo assured him. “She know
she gotta look to me to pay de bill for fixin’ ’um. Lethe kin git new
teeth; but who you think goin’ puvvide me wid a good reppatashun, after
Lethe done spread de news, an’ my name bin walked on by a passul o’
mean-minded Gritny niggers?... W’ich one be de worse off den, me or
Lethe?”

“Don’t you suppose Lethe values her good name as much as you do yours?”
Mr. Amos argued with him. “If she exposes you, she exposes herself.
No woman with pride will do a thing like that. She’ll lie to protect
herself. And you’ll see that Lethe is no exception.”

Felo seemed greatly relieved, hearing this.

“Now, da’s de way I like to hyeah you talk,” he said. “Straighten de
thing out for me. Tell me w’at I mus’ do.”

“Go to see Lethe tomorrow and have an understanding with her,” Mr. Amos
suggested. “Tell her you’re sorry, and you want to set things right.
Explain your position in the church, and make her see hers as well. And
if she cares anything at all for you, she’ll certainly listen to reason.”

“Da’s suffishen,” Felo agreed, in a tone which seemed to tell that he was
resolved to fulfill his duty. Then came an after-thought:

“But I sho Gawd hope dem missin’ teeth in de front ’uh mouth goin’ make
’uh feel ’shame’ ’bout ’uh looks, an’ keep ’uh from goin’ in de street
till I git to see ’uh.”

“Start early in the morning,” Mr. Amos advised. “Take the day off, and
finish up the job before you come back.”

A smile of appreciation lighted his face and his voice resumed its
habitual cheerfulness.

“Man, you sho got a good head for somebody bin raised in Gritny. De onles
diffunce twix’ you an’ me: you wise-minded from readin’ in books an’
things; an’ po’ me, I ain’ got nothin’ but mother-wit.... But I’m goin’
do jes’ like you say; an’ leave hyuh firs’ thing in de mawnin’, soon as I
give you yo’ coffee.”

“And be sure to take the touch-me-nots with you to give to Lethe,” Mr.
Amos reminded him, with a playful smile.

Getting up from his chair suddenly, he pretended to be greatly annoyed,
and walked over to the bed-side to cover his embarrassment, saying:

“Man, git up from hyuh, wid dat ole cat, an’ lemme fix yo’ bed so you kin
lay down an’ sleep an’ stop thinkin’ up a whole lot o’ humbug.... Come
on; you done plague me enough for one night.... Lemme turn down de bed
for you, so I kin go lay down an’ pray.”




Next morning Felo was away from the house before eight o’clock, on his
way to Gretna to make peace with the belligerent Lethe. His mind was
disturbed by many conflicting emotions when he tried to think how she
would receive him.

As the ferry pulled in to the Gretna landing, his uneasiness became
intense; for he recognized several of his colored friends on their way
to the City to dispose of their various wares. The pontoon was crowded
with _marchande_ women, with large flat baskets of vegetables balanced
on their heads; the careful arrangement of the shining, dew-washed,
maroon-colored beets, scarlet peppers, pale green lettuce, and the golden
carrots with plume-like foliage, making the baskets from a distance
appear like gigantic, colorful hats decked for a rustic festival.

In the crowd he recognized Lizzie and Chester, each with a basket of
vegetables. If Lizzie had heard anything from Lethe, she would be sure to
mention it. He was relieved when she spoke first.

“Hi! Mr. Felo,” she greeted him, as she came off the boat. “Y’awter
staid longer to de wake Sunday night. We sho did give Aun’ Milly a good
sen’-over. I staid till close on to fo’ clock in de mawnin’. An’ I
wouldn’ a-lef’ den, but de coffee gived out.”

“You know if Lethe goin’ to de burryin’?” Felo inquired artfully.

“I ain’ seen Lethe since Sunday night, Mr. Felo. I pass by ’uh house dis
mawnin’, but it look like nobody was home.”

This information reassured him. Lizzie knew nothing, therefore Lethe had
not told her trouble abroad.

The boat bell rang, and Lizzie and Chester hurried on board, calling
to Felo, they hoped to see him next Sunday. He waved good-by to them,
passing on with a feeling of gratitude.

As he turned into the street where Lethe lived, he looked toward the
house and saw a thin blue reek of smoke curling up from the dilapidated
chimney. A mockingbird was sitting on the corner of the roof, singing;
telling the heedless world of the prodigal beauty of the sunshine and the
fleeting glory of the morning.

“Da’s a good sign,” Felo commented. “Nobody ain’ got no business bein’
down-casted w’en dumb critters kin feel de sperret o’ Gawd wakin’-up
inside ’um, like dat bird yonder shoutin’ ’bout it.”

He looked at the old house and thought how different it seemed from
the other night when he saw it in the silent moonlight. How inviting
it looked, with the sunshine playing over the gallery and its rickety
old posts, covered with flowering vines; a veritable basket of rampant
wistaria and luxuriant honeysuckle.

He opened the gate and went around the side way, without calling. Lethe
was in the back yard, feeding chickens; and she didn’t see him until he
came where she was standing. She made no sign of recognition until he
spoke.

“Lethe, you don’ wan’ tell me good-mawnin’?” He asked quietly. “If you
feel like you don’ wan’ talk, I kin go back whah I come from.”

“Who invite you to come hyuh, any way?” She asked, indifferently.

“I ain’ had to wait for no inv’tation,” he answered curtly. “I come hyuh
’cause my min’ lead me to come hyuh. To see how you gittin’ ’long....
To bring you dis aw’inge-rine purzerve I made for you.” (Offering her a
glass of home-made orange marmalade.)

She looked at him unmoved; without a show of surprise, resentment or
just indignation; wondering what to say to him. Was he conscious of his
meanness, she thought. If so, was she ready to forgive him, having had
time to consider her unwarranted jealousy, provoked by Lizzie’s malicious
gossip? But why did she doubt Felo when he tried to make her know that
Lizzie lied. She knew he never showed any interest in other women as
long as she had known him. And if he came specially to see her today,
surely he would be ready to stand the expense of a few missing teeth.
What was the loss of a few teeth compared with the loss of a friendly
company-keeper like Felo?... And any way, wasn’t she the one who struck
the first blow?...

Having deliberated with herself to her apparent satisfaction, she told
him to put the glass of marmalade in the kitchen, “till I ketch me one
dese chickens to make some soup.”

“You goin’ have comp’ny?” Felo asked. The thought of chicken seeming to
indicate the approach of some festive occasion.

“W’at I wan’ do havin’ comp’ny, wid all dese teeth missin’ out de front
o’ my mouth?” She replied sharply; wondering at his total lack of
judgment. “People can’t eat chicken out dey own yard lessen dey gotta
have comp’ny to eat wid ’um?”

“I ain’ findin’ fault wid you ’bout yo’ likin’s, Lethe,” he apologized.
“I was thinkin’ ’bout you settin’ down by yo’self, eating lonesome; ’dout
anybody to talk wid you, da’s all.”

Her frown seemed to deepen, and her voice assumed a tone of annoyance.

“Wa’t I want wid anybody comin’ hyuh to talk to me, all lavadated like
I is; wid all dese teeth missin’ in de front o’ my mouth? You come hyuh
to make game an’ crow over me, ’stid o’ beggin’ my pardner for de nasty
trick you done played on me?... You ain’ think one li’l ole glass o’
aw’inge-rine purzerve kin make up for de wrong you done commit, is you?
You mus’ be a fatal fool, if you do.”

Felo looked at her appealingly. He was ready to make any number of
apologies, if she would only listen. As for the teeth, she “oughta know
de one w’at broke ’um called on to put new ones in dey place; if ’e any
kind o’ man w’at calls ’imself a man.”

“But some people waits a long time aft’ dey bin called on; makin’ up dey
min’ ’bout de thing dey gotta do,” she told him. “An’ a toothless ooman
ain’ need to have much patience w’en she look in de glass an’ see how
ugly she be.”

“Lethe, for Gawd sake don’ talk so fas’,” he pleaded. “Go ketch yo’
chicken, like you say you wan’ do; den leave us set down an’ talk de
thing over an’ un’stan’ one-’nother. ’Cause my min’ too upset ’bout de
whole business; an’ I wan’ try an’ git straight befo’ I go ’way from hyuh
today. Go ketch de chicken. I kin look to de stove an’ fix de pot o’
scaldin’ water an’ things ready for you, yonder in de kitchen.”

Whereupon he went into the house, Lethe’s silence being a sign of
approval.

As he walked away, Lethe threw a handful of feed from the pan she held,
and the chickens gathered about her and began pecking greedily. After
looking them over carefully, she selected the one she wanted; stooped
slowly and grabbed the unwary chicken by the neck. She took a tight grasp
just below its head and began swinging it around vigorously. Two or
three times it went around in a circle at arm’s length; when suddenly
it was severed, the body of the chicken falling to the ground, the head
remaining in her hand. The frightened hens ran off, squawking; and the
roosters ran over where the bleeding victim lay kicking, pecking at it
and making loud commotion. Lethe stood by and watched it until the last
sign of life was gone; then stooped and picked it up and went into the
house.

Felo was ready with the pot of scalding water, which he poured over the
chicken when Lethe put it in the dishpan. After it cooled a bit, he
began picking off the feathers; while Lethe busied herself with other
preparations for the little meal for two. The time being propitious, Felo
made ready to unburden himself, and began his explanation. His talk was
free and persuasive, and Lethe listened, offering little or no dissenting
comment. She could appreciate his feeling of pride, and assured him that
she would be the “las’ person in dis worl’ to put bad mouth on him an’
roll any stone in his way.”

He told her he was glad that he had not been disappointed in her, and
thanked her profusely. She was the right kind of a woman. He “always
knowed she was’n no shoo-fly, picayune nigger; an’ knowed still better
now, since he done had good chance to tes’ her senserra.” (Sincerity.)

While the chicken boiled they sat talking of Lizzie and Chester; Aunt
Milly’s funeral, which was to take place that day; and many other
things of mutual importance—Lethe getting up from time to time to add
the necessary vegetables and seasoning to the chicken soup to “give it
supshun.” She “stirred up a bowl o’ batter for pan-cakes,” which she
fried in bacon grease; and as soon as she finished dripping a pot full of
strong coffee, they sat down to eat.

It was a veritable feast to Felo, now the old relations were
re-established between them; and he hated the thought of leaving. But
he was obliged to be on duty when Mr. Amos came home in the evening. He
wanted Lethe to go to Aunt Milly’s funeral for a “li’l pleasan’ change o’
mind”; but she said she “felt too ’shame’ to face a big crowd o’ people
wid no teeth in her mouth”; that she would stay at home.

He told her good-by at the front gate, and started home feeling like he
had a “whole nes’ full o’ butterflies turned loose in his stummick.”




Lizzie Cole was one of those ignorant, reckless children of Nature,
utterly disregardful of the simplest rudiments of anything resembling
law or religion; in consequence of which, she was unable to live at home
with her God-fearing father and conventional step-mother. For a long time
she had lived by herself, in a decrepit-looking two-room hut, far across
the pasture in the East Green, away on the other side of the town.

The old shanty sat back in the yard, partly hidden from the road by a
high, dilapidated picket fence and a hedge of giant cocklebur bushes;
with two scraggy persimmon trees on one side by way of ornament.

If you happened to pass by on wash day, and saw the cocklebur bushes
decorated with innumerable articles of clothing of every imaginable
color, you soon learned their usefulness and lost sight of the
unnecessary expense of a clothes-line. It also gave you a better
understanding of Lizzie’s impatience with anyone who stupidly advised
cutting the cocklebur bushes down as worthless weeds and dangerous
breeding places for snakes and mosquitoes.

From time to time, Chester made “guests visits” to the retired hut; doing
the cooking, washing, sewing and other domestic work; while Lizzie walked
out selling blackberries and vegetables; or went gallivanting here and
there in search of friendly entertainment.

To Lizzie’s cheerful way of thinking, there was no form of pleasure more
enjoyable than a “good funeral.” The news of anybody’s dying always
wakened up her spirits; and she “never missed goin’ to a wake or burrin’
if Gawd lef’ her strank to git there.”

It was just about sunset when Lizzie came back from Aunt Milly’s funeral.
Chester was in the yard, washing, under the persimmon trees; and long
before he saw her, he heard her coming across the pasture singing gaily.
As she opened the gate and came in, she called to him good-naturedly:

“Leave dem ole tubs alone for tonight, Chester, an’ come-in-doahs; I wan’
tell you ’bout evvything w’at happened.”

He followed her into the house, eager to hear all she had to tell.

The room was dark, and he lit a candle and put it on the mantelpiece.
A sickly fire was smoldering on the hearth; and after raking the coals
together and starting it to burn well with a few shingles, he threw a
large piece of wood across the andirons, and sat down on the floor.

The place was orderly; the floor, spotlessly clean. Near the window was
a deal table with a few dishes and pans on it, and a wooden bucket
of drinking water and a dipper. Across from the chimney in the “guest
corner” of the room, was a low cot covered with a patch-work quilt, a
trophy from one of Carmelite’s raffles; a gay masterpiece of bewildering
design which she called the “fifty revalashuns of de forty-seven
wonders.” The walls were covered with newspapers, ornamented here and
there with gay-colored circus posters and magazine covers; and the
mantelshelf, decorated with a towering pyramid of empty coffee, tomato
and baking-powder cans, bright and shining as “any natchal silver on de
w’ite-folks side-boa’d.”

While Chester was fixing the fire, Lizzie had gone into the adjoining
room and taken off her shoes and exchanged her “good street clo’se” for
a “sloven fit”; so her body, as well as her mind, might enjoy perfect
freedom of movement throughout the evening conference.

“Now, I kin talk to my natchal comfut,” she said to Chester, coming into
the room and drawing a stool before the fire and sitting down near him.

Chester was all attention, so there was little need for useless
preliminaries. Looking at the fire meditatively Lizzie began her
interesting soliloquy, her voice low and quiet.

“Nobody can’t say that ole Aunt Milly didn’t have a fine burryin’,” she
told him.... “Look like people had come from every direction to sing
over Aunt Milly just for ole time sake; and because she come from so far
away.... Look like some people shed tears over Aunt Milly because she was
gone; and some for the good she did.... And she never knowed one woman
her own color, old or young, to have so many fine flowers at one time;
flowers so natchal till they looked artificial....

“But de one thing goin’ keep my min’ rollin’ for a long time,” she
continued, stressing every word with dramatic fervor, “was de soun’
o’ dat water gluggin’ in de coffin w’en dey let Aun’ Milly down in de
grave.... De same way you hyeah it go glug-glug-glug w’en you hol’ a
empty bottle und’ de water, an’ de soun’ keep on’ gluggin’ till de bottle
be filled up.... Yas, Lawd.

“It sho was a soun’ dat made me cunsider w’at I want y’all do wid me
w’en de time come for puttin’ me away.... An’ Chester, I want you look
to it; you hyeah me?... You know dis lan’ is a swampy lan’; an’ it hol’s
de water a long time; ’specially aft’ a heavy rain bin fall. An’ you kin
bail de water out a grave much as you want, but you can’ keep it from
seepin’ back in agin.... So you make ’um put me way up on a top shelf in
dat big tomb ’long-side de back fence, yonder in de Gates o’ Mary, high
an’ dry out de flood. ’Cause I sho don’ wan’ think ’bout bein’ drownded
aft’ I done died in my bed natchal.... No Lawd, not me!”

“Sho mus’ bin made Aun’ Amy felt bad,” Chester commiserated.

“Who?” Lizzie exclaimed with sudden animation. “Aun’ Amy ain’ knowed a
single thing w’at went on w’en dey put Aun’ Milly way.... She fell to
sleep in de ca’idge on de way to de graveyard; an’ w’en dey reached de
place, an’ wan’ try an’ make Aun’ Amy git out an’ walk to de grave-side,
leadin’ de moaners; de po’ ole soul was so helpless drunk, dey had to
leave ’uh settin’ up in de ca’idge in de road.... An’ she ain’ took no
part in _none_ de excitement.”

Chester laughed heartily. “Lawd! I’m sho sorry I missed goin’ wid you,”
he remarked. “But stop talkin’ ’bout dead people, Lizzie; an’ tell who
else you seen yonder.”

“Chester, you ain’ expec’ me to tell you ’bout all dat mult’tude o’
niggers dey had to Aun’ Milly funeyun, is you?” Lizzie asked, playfully.
“De main thing I got to tell you, is ’bout Sis’ Tempe. Me an’ her walked
home together; an’ chile, w’at she had to say, sho got my min’ upset
thinkin’ ’bout it.”

“W’at make you wan’ worry ’bout anything Sis’ Tempe tell you? Don’t you
know Tempe ain’ bin right ever since Unc’ Peesah died? An’ her min’ comes
and goes?” Chester reminded her.

“Da’s de very thing I’m comin’ to,” Lizzie answered. “Tempe
simple-minded, I know. But if she keep on goin’ ’roun ’munks people an’
talkin’ like she talk to me today; ’tain goin’ be but _one_ po’ nigger
land in jail befo’ de end o’ dis year be over; a’ dat nigger ain’ goin’
be nobody but Chester.”

“W’at thing dis is Tempe done mixed me up in?” Chester asked in dull
amazement.

Lizzie told him how Tempe complained to her about everything going to
ruin since Peesah died, leaving her with nobody to take care of the
place. How the garden needed plowing, and nobody wanted to do it for
her. How she thought of selling her mule and dump cart to Nat, because
she had no money to keep them; and what money she got by selling them
would buy food and clothes and all she needed.... That she knew somebody
was burning a candle over her to keep bad luck in her way just for
“envy-stripe”.... That she was sure of it; because she found red pepper
and buzzard feathers and candle-sperm tracks on her front door steps,
three Friday mornings hand-running....

But they couldn’t fool her. She knew who it was; and wasn’t afraid to
tell, either.... It wasn’t nobody but the same sly nigger that lived
next-door to her the time Peesah died so sudden.... Couldn’t be nobody
else.... That’s why he moved away from next door.... To keep people
from knowing anything about the needle.... But Gawd don’t sleep. And
everything got to come out when God command you to speak your mind....

And Peesah had come to her in her sleep three times already. And she saw
the needle in his hand plain as day. And he called out to her so loud,
her sleep was broke for the rest of the night....

“She say she hyeah’d Unc’ Peesah call to ’uh:

    “Tempe, take dis needle back!
    Put it in de place whah de needle b’lonks.
    Lissen w’at I tell you, an’ do w’at I say!”

“An’ dah whah she say she seen de needle in ’uh own han’; but Unc’ Peesah
was gone clean out o’ sight.”

Chester looked about the room uneasily; and got up and closed the front
door. Lizzie watched him, waiting for him to speak. He went over to the
cot and sat down, looking at her questioningly.

“You think Tempe seen Peesah sperret sho’ ’nuff?” He asked her.

“Da’s de very thing I wan’ know myself,” she answered. “But ain’t you say
Tempe min’ comes an’ goes?... Maybe ’tain’ nothin’ but Tempe ’maginashun
make ’uh think she seen Unc’ Peesah sperret.”

“But ain’ she say she had de needle in ’uh own han’ aft’ he done lef’?”
Chester reminded her.

“Da’s w’at she say,” Lizzie answered. “An’ if you wan’ b’lieve ’uh, it
sho look like de needle p’intin’ to’ads you bein’ de lawful owner; Tempe
nex’-do’ neighbor, de time Unc’ Peesah died. Don’t it?”

He couldn’t deny that Tempe had come to him for the needle and that he
had given it to her. Lizzie knew that he had always been an obliging
neighbor to Tempe, lending her anything she needed if he happened to have
it.

The evening Uncle Peesah “took down wid de colic,” Tempe ran over to
Chester to borrow a needle and thread to “sew up a salt-sack full o’
hot bran, to lay on Peesah stummick to ease de mizry.” Chester gave her
the needle and thread and she went home with it. Late that night Uncle
Peesah died; and Tempe told every one that his death was caused from
eating cucumber salad and buttermilk. It was a reasonable excuse, and
as nobody bothered about making any sort of examination to ascertain
the real cause, Tempe felt perfectly secure. But Chester had his doubts.
Tempe had long confided her troubles to him, and he knew how Peesah’s
unfaithfulness had aroused her jealousy on numerous occasions; and how
she had threatened to wreak vengeance, and “git even wid ’im for runnin’
wid yuther wimmins.” Therefore it was natural for Chester to suspect her
of using the borrowed needle for a secret instrument of fatal despatch.

“But who you think goin’ pay any ’tenshun to Tempe ramblin’ talk ’bout
who de needle b’lonks to?” Chester asked, after thoughtful consideration.
“Nobody ain’ goin’ know w’at she mean.”

“Nobody ain’ goin’ know?” Lizzie demanded. “You better look ove’ yo’
min’, boy; an’ think on Felo an’ Soongy an’ ole treach’ous Gussie, an’
all dem yuther niggers dey had to Susan house Sunday, w’en you was
tellin’ ’bout how Unc’ Peesah died.... You ain’ think you safe from
suspicion wid all dem tongues waggin’; once dey done learned Tempe
puttin’ de blame on you. Is you?”

“How you reckon I’m goin’ keep ’um from talkin’?” He appealed to her. “I
ain’ see no way I kin stop ’um, if dey wan’ lissen at w’at a crazy ooman
say.”

“Da’s de very thing you gotta consider,” Lizzie advised him. “You gotta
go see Tempe, an’ talk to ’uh bol’ an’ brazen; an’ make ’uh un’stan she
gotta keep still; lessen you give way de whole truth ’bout de thing; an’
bring ’uh up befo’ de law, an’ make ’um prove who de guilty one. Da’s
w’at you gotta do.... An’ you better go dis very night; aft’ you done had
a li’l somh’n to eat. So come on; lessus git somh’n ready right now. An’
you go yonder to Tempe house soon’s you git thoo.”

Chester got up, and placed two bricks at the front of the hearth, then
raked out a small pile of coals between them. He filled a pot with water
from the bucket on the table and put it over the bricks, to boil for
coffee: Lizzie cut a few slices of salt pork which she took from a basket
hanging from a rafter near the window; laid them in a skillet with some
grease and sliced onions, and put it over the fire to fry. She cut some
cheese, broke a loaf of twist-bread in several parts, put the bread and
cheese on a plate, and placed it by the side of the hearth. When the
coffee was made and the meat was fried, she filled a pan for Chester and
one for herself, and they sat down before the fire and began eating.

Neither one seemed inclined to talk, feeling that conversation of
any kind would cause delay; and Chester’s visit to Tempe had to be
accomplished that night.

As soon as he finished drinking his coffee, Lizzie said to him: “Leave
evvything be, jes like it is, an’ you go straight off. An’ be sho you
make Tempe un’stan good, dat you know w’at you know.... An’ don’ talk too
timmasun (timorous) either.”

Chester nodded assent; put on his hat and coat, and started off across
the pasture, on his way to Tempe’s.




At every second street corner of the town, as a protection in time of
fire, there were large underground wells, bricked-in and covered over
with heavy boards. In time of drouth, when the supply of cistern water
had to be economized for drinking purposes, the villagers used the well
water for their cattle, truck gardens, and for washing clothes; but owing
to the earthy, swampy taste of the water, it was unfit for drinking.

The floor-like tops of these wells were delightful gathering places for
the colored children of the neighborhood on moonlight nights. Here they
would congregate for their merry games and romping; the pleasant sound of
their happy voices becoming a sort of evening service for the old folks
who came out of doors to sit on the gutter-curb and doorsteps, eager to
enjoy a bit of friendly gossip after a long day’s toil.

Tempe was sitting in the doorway of her house, in the glowing moonlight,
smoking her pipe and listening to the singing children at the corner,
when Chester came up to her.

“’Deevnin’, Sis’ Tempe,” he greeted her politely. “I was wond’rin if I
was goin’ fin’ you at yo’ house. You know who dis is, don’t you?”

She looked at him quietly, making no sign of recognition.

“Dis me, Sis’ Tempe,” he said, taking a seat near her. “Dis Chester.
Chester Frackshun, w’at use to live ’longside you, yonder ’cross de
green.”

“I ain’ forgot who you is,” she told him, looking at him searchingly. “I
ain’ forget nothin’.... An’ you ain’ need to tell me w’at you come after,
either. Cause I’m sho goin’ give de thing back to de lawful owner, now
you done come hyuh.”

Getting up to go into the house, she said to him: “Set hyuh on de
do’-step till I come back.”

“Lemme come inside wid you, Sis’ Tempe,” Chester suggested, getting up to
follow her. “I wan’ talk wid you on a li’l business.”

“Stay right whah you is till I come back, I tell you,” she commanded,
looking at him fixedly for several seconds before going inside.

Chester sat down again and waited on the steps for her to return.

After a while she came back with a cup of salt in her hand, and stood
mumbling some unintelligible words, as she sprinkled the salt across the
threshold, in the form of a cross. Having finished, she said to him:

“De one dey call Chester kin come in, now. But w’at be fol’rin ’im, gotta
stay out-do’s.”

He made no comment about the strange invitation, but got up and went
inside.

The room was in semi-darkness; the only light being the reflected glow
of a candle in the back room, and a narrow stream of moonlight coming
through the open door at the front, falling across the well-scrubbed
floor like a stripe of tarnished silver.

“Set hyuh whah I kin seen you,” Tempe said; placing a chair near the door
where the moonlight would fall across him.

Chester took the offered seat, and Tempe sat down opposite, half-hidden
in the shadow.

“You mus’ bin know I wan’ see you?” she asked. And without waiting for
his reply, she went on speaking in a kind of ecstasy:

“Boy, de sperret o’ Gawd don’ never work in vain.

“An’ don’t you never try to b’lieve de sperret gives up.

“E knows ’is own strank; an’ ’e knows ’is time.

“An’ soon or later, ’e sho goin’ track you down, an’ all de wrong-doin’
you done commit in de dark, de sperret o’ Gawd goin’ drag it fo’th an’
shame you in de light o’ day!

“Yas, Jesus.... You hyeah me talkin’?”

“Yas. I hyeah you talkin’,” Chester answered abruptly. “But w’at you
talkin’ ’bout, Sis’ Tempe, ain’ nothin’ cuncernin’ me. You better ’zamine
yo’ own cawnshunce, an’ see w’at de sperret o’ Gawd goin’ bring to light
to ’cuse you wid yo’ own-self.... An’ don’t you try to drag me in de
thing either.... ’Cause you know w’at you know. An’ I know a heap mo’ on
de subjec’ w’at you ain’ never thought over.... So dey got two’v us to
git up an’ talk on de queshtun, w’en de time come for provin’ who got to
stan’ de blame.... So you better cunsider long an’ careful, befo’ you go
’roun hyuh talkin’ so broadcas’.... You hyeah w’at I tell you?”

His tone was severe and emphatic; and she sat looking at him in subdued
silence. He felt sorry for her, and wanted her to know that he was
willing to help her any way he could.

“You ain’ got to be ’fraid o’ me, Sis’ Tempe,” he told her feelingly.
“Don’t you know ’tain’ nobody but you an’ me kin tell anything ’bout de
needle?... Put de thing out yo’ ’membunce, an’ stop worrin’ ’bout it.
Talkin’ too much on de thing only goin’ make people mo’ suspicious; an’
dat ain’ goin’ help you none.”

Tempe contemplated his face in the moonlight for a few seconds before
answering.

“But Peesah de one don’ wan’ lemme res’,” she faltered. “Evvy night, w’en
I be sleepin’, ’e comes to me des like ’is natchal self, an’ tawments my
po’ soul ’bout dat needle so, till I has to git up out de bed an’ walk
’roun’ de room, an’ try’n fin’ somh’n to do to ease my min’.”

Chester told her of several charms he was sure would help her. The old
folks said they were the only protection against ghosts and spirits, and
they couldn’t fail if you did them the right way.—A pan of water on the
door-step in the moonlight: Death won’t cross water while the moon is
shining on it.—A mirror placed by the side of the bed: Death don’t want
to see himself in a looking-glass.—Leave a dog in the room when you go to
bed; dogs can see spirits in the dark, and Death don’t like to hear a
dog howl in the night-time.

Tempe said she had tried them all, and none of the charms had helped her.

He told her about putting nettles on the floor; scattered over the
threshold and sprinkled around the bed: Death wouldn’t walk on
“stingin’-nettles” in the house, because he had to walk on them in the
graveyard. But the nettles had to be picked at midnight, when the heavy
dew was on them.

Tempe told him she was glad to know the new charm, and would try it
that night. She knew where some nettles were growing alongside Miss
Collamore’s fence by the corner. Maybe white-folks’ nettles would be
better. She would wait until midnight, and go pick them, and sprinkle
them on the floor before she went to bed.

Chester assured her that the charm would work; and he felt pleased that
he was able to give her something that would divert her attention from
the mysterious needle, and the accusing thoughts that disturbed her mind.
He wished her good luck, and arose to go; saying that he would pass by in
the morning to hear what happened.

Tempe followed him to the door and said good-night. Just as he was
leaving, Nat came along; and stopping in front of the door-step, saluted
them cheerfully.

“Great-day-in-de-mawnin’, Sis’ Tempe!” He exclaimed. “It done took me so
long to walk way down hyuh to see you tonight, I feel like I bin trav’lin
de road since day-break.... W’at make you wan’ live so further away like
dis, anyhow?... An’ how you do dis evenin’?... An’ boy, I’m sho glad dey
got somebody hyuh to help me wid dat mule I come after. Hitchin’-up a
strange mule in de moonlight by yo’-self ain’ no fun, lemme tell you.
’Cause I know Sis’ Tempe ain’ none too handy w’en it come to handlin’
harness an’ things, an’ backin’-up a sleepy mule in a dump-cart shaf’,
long aft’ hours like dis is.... Ain’ da’s right, Sister?”

“I was lookin’ for you to come hyuh in de day-time,” Tempe told him. “Aft
I see de night fell, an’ you ain’ sont no word one way o’ nother; somh’n
tol’ me maybe you done change yo’ min’ ’bout buyin’ de mule.”

“But you see me hyuh now, don’t you?” Nat argued. “Anybody ever told you
’bout Nat goin’ back ’is word, aft’ he done promise somebody he goin’ buy
somh’n from ’um? An’ de thing be somh’n w’at he need?”

“Unc’ Nat, w’at make you wan’ was’e time dis way, an’ bring up a
onnes’sary wrangle?” Chester asked him. “If you wan’ hitch-up de mule to
take home wid you tonight, you better come on an’ lemme help you; ’cause
I gotta go back ’cross de pastur to Lizzie house befo’ it git too late.”

“Boy, you sho talkin’ gospel,” Nat answered. “Come on, Sis’ Tempe, an’
show me whah de mule at; an’ lemme git thoo an’ go ’way from hyuh.”

“De mule dis way in de yard,” said Tempe, coming out of the house and
leading them through the side gate. “But you gotta fetch a bucket o’
water from de well, yonder to de cawnder; ’cause de po’ critter ain’ had
no water to drink all day. I ain’ able to tote no water.”

She hunted about the yard until she found a bucket with a rope tied to
the handle. She gave it to Chester and he went to fetch the water from
the well at the corner. The children had ended their singing and playing
for the night and were gone home; and the deserted street seemed to be
wondering at the untimely silence coming at an hour of such marvellous
moonlight.

Getting down on his knees, Chester tugged with the cover of the well
until he lifted it out of its groove. Then he let the bucket down through
the narrow opening, dangling and swinging it about until it sank. When
it was filled with water he pulled it up; got up on his feet, and made
ready to get back to Nat. He deliberated for a second whether or not to
close the well.

“Might be I gotta come git a yuther bucket,” he said to himself. “De
dev’lish lid so tight to git loose, I’m goin’ leave it stay open till I
come back agin.”

Whereupon he took up the bucket of water and went back to the yard.

Nat had finished hitching the mule and was standing by the dump cart
talking to Tempe. Chester put the bucket of water before the mule and he
drank it greedily, and seemed eager for more. Chester wanted to go for
another bucketful, but Nat was impatient to get away, and told him not to
go.

“One bucketful enough to hol’ ’im till we git up yonder on the coas’; den
he kin lap de whole ditch dry if he like, w’en I turn ’im loose in de
lane.... Come on, lemme go ’way from hyuh,” he said, climbing up on the
seat of the cart. “An’ Sis’ Tempe, I’ll see you ’bout de secon’ payment
aft’ I done tried de mule out wid de harrow in de fiel’ tomorrow.... An’
boy, lemme thank you for givin’ me a han’ wid de mule nice like you did.
An’ I’ll sho think to bring you somh’n from de g’yarden, nex’ time I come
down to Gritny.... Peace an’ hap’ness to y’all.... Come on, ole mule.
Nat’s gone.”

The cart went bumping up the street, and Tempe closed the gate and
walked with Chester towards the front door. As she went into the house,
he reminded her to go for the nettles at midnight; and to be sure that
nobody saw her when she stooped to pick them. Tempe said she would
remember to do all he told her; bade him good-night and closed the door
as he walked away.




Eager to get back and tell Lizzie the outcome of his visit to Tempe,
Chester took the short cut across the pasture. The moonlight was so
brilliant, he could trace the entire length of the worn pathway through
the shining dew-dripping weeds along its edges. A cool breeze was blowing
from the woods, and the dampness of the grass causing him to feel chilly,
he pulled up his coat. As he walked along, singing, he was conscious of
being pleased that he had accomplished something. He had spoken his mind
and felt satisfied that Tempe would stop talking, and no blame would be
attached to his name. Lizzie would be glad to know how he straightened
things out with Tempe, and she would stop worrying about his getting
into trouble.

When he reached home, the door was closed and the house was in total
darkness. Lizzie had gone to bed; and he knew he would have to go in
quietly, because if he wakened her, she would be cross and make a racket.

Disappointed that he would have to wait until morning to tell her about
his visit, he undressed quietly and got into bed. The sound of snoring in
the next room told him that Lizzie was in her “first sleep”; so he knew
that it would be a long time before she would awake. Thinking he might
forget his disappointment, he began to pray.

However short and simple of form his sincere appeal may have been,
it served him as might any formula of cabalistic worth. Bringing to
his childish mind not only quiet forgetfulness; but quick, conquering
somnolence, with a myriad train of fantastic visions; tantalizing his
superstitious soul, and holding him in helpless captivity until the
mystic hour of midnight came to break the spell.

A rooster, high up on a branch of the persimmon tree in the side yard,
looking out across the pasture, and seeing the moon slipping down the
heavens, flapped his wings lustily and gave a ringing salute that floated
off on the wind to tell his fellow-fowls that morning was on the way to
greet the sleeping world.

Chester heard the clarion sound in the tangle of his dream, and awaking
with a start, he jumped out of bed and ran to Lizzie’s room, calling to
her excitedly:

“Lizzie! You ’wake?” He shouted, going to the bed-side, and shaking her
roughly. “Wake up, for Gawd sake; an’ lemme talk to you!... Did you hyeah
dat noise jes’ now befo’ I come in de room?”

Lizzie sat up quickly and answered in an angry tone:

“Boy, you mus’ be losin’ yo’ min’, ain’t you? W’at you mean, comin’ hyuh
an’ wakin’ me out my slumbers, axin’ me ’bout any noise, like somebody
done gone crazy?... Go back to bed, yonder in yo’ room. An’ damn you an’
dis kind o’ humbug; way in de middle o’ de night like dis!... You ain’
walkin’ in yo’ sleep, is you?”

“Lizzie, for Gawd sake lissen at w’at I’m try’n to tell you,” he pleaded.
“Ain’t you hyeah’d de noise,—like somebody callin’ for help?... Callin’
an’ moanin’ so pitiful, it woke me out a heavy sleep.... Gawd knows. I
could hyeah it plain as day.... An’ ’long wid de moanin’ I could heayh de
soun’ like water splashin’.... Gawd knows, Lizzie.... An’ I dunno w’at
make you ain’ bin able to hyeah it, loud an’ natchal as dat thing was
soundin’.”

Becoming suddenly aware of the humor of the situation, Lizzie began
laughing with keen enjoyment.

“Nigger, you mus’ bin had de night-mare,” she told him. “You better go
look an’ see if you ain’ knocked over dat bucket o’ water on de table
yonder.... Talkin’ ’bout hyeahin’ water splashin’.... Go back to bed,
boy, an’ lay down. An’ quit dis foolishness, an’ lemme git some mo’
sleep.”

Determined to convince her that what he heard was no imaginary sound, he
persisted:

“Lizzie, w’at make you think I wan’ joke on somh’n seerus like dis thing
is?... I tell you de noise I hyeah’d was a reel, _natchal_ noise. An’
it kep’ up de whole time I was gittin’ out o’ bed till I got hyuh an’
shuck you ’wake. An’ w’en I commence walkin’ ’cross de room, it look like
all my laigs was stingin’ me, same as if somebody bin switchin’ ’um wid
stingin’-nettles.”

“Chester, git out o’ hyuh, wid yo’ lyin’ self!” Lizzie commanded, with a
show of irritation. “Hyuh you done laid up in yo’ bed half de night in a
crooked position, till yo’ blood done gone to sleep; an’ come tellin’ me
’bout somebody switchin’ yo’ laigs wid stingin’-nettles!... Git out o’
hyuh.... ’Cause I know if I raise up out dis bed an’ shove you thoo dat
do’, you sho Gawd will go lay down, aft’ my han’s done fell on you....
You hyeah w’at I’m say’n?”

“I hyeah you,” he answered forlornly. “But you watch if you don’ hyeah
bad news tomorrow mornin’.... A callin’ noise like dat noise I hyeah’d,
sho do puhdick somh’n.... An’ Jesus goin’ be my witness I ain’ lissen at
nothin’ on-natchal dis night o’ my good Lawd.”

Leaning over the side of the bed, Lizzie trailed her hand along the floor
until she found one of her shoes. Suspecting her intention, Chester
started to leave the room, when she fired the shoe at him, shouting:

“Git out o’ hyuh, I tell you! An’ don’t you lemme hyeah you say another
word tonight.”

Unable to sleep, he lit a candle on the mantelshelf, and sat down on the
side of his cot, trying to calm himself. He tried to pray, but he could
not concentrate, his mind was so disturbed. The room was cold, and the
dim cheerless light of the candle made him uncomfortable. Maybe if he lit
a fire and made some coffee he would feel stronger, he thought.

Taking some dried leaves and chips from the box in the corner, he put
them on the hearth between the andirons; laid a few branches over them
and lighted the fire with the candle. As the bright flame leaped up the
chimney, brightening the room with a cheerful glow, and streaking the
floor and ceiling with long quivering shadows; he sat down before the
hearth and began humming softly.

Seeing the reflection through the open door, and hearing the low rumble
of his voice, Lizzie called to him impatiently:

“Chester, if you think you goin’ hol’ a all-night swaree yonder in dat
kitchen wid nobody but yo’ fool-self, you better come close dis do’, so
dat light won’ keep me from sleepin’.”

He got up and closed the door quietly; went over to his cot and took the
quilt; and after wrapping it about him, he drew a chair before the fire
and sat down. The genial warmth and the soothing crackling of the burning
branches set his mind to thinking of other things; and very soon he found
himself tranquilly sinking into utter forgetfulness; snugly enfolded by
the “fifty revelashuns of de forty-seven wonders.”




The season for growing things being almost over, only a few vegetables
were left in Nat’s garden. Several beds of sweet potatoes and pumpkin
vines told that a few yams and cashaws remained to be gathered; and
there was still a small supply of succulent spinach, bordered with rows
of bright green parsley; and plenty of glossy red peppers on the sturdy
bushes growing along the side fence.

Before seven o’clock in the morning, with a warm sunshine falling over
everything, Nat was at work with Tempe’s mule hitched to the harrow;
trying to get the ground ready for lettuce planting before the first
frost fall.

Up and down the long rows of lumpy ground he followed the harrow, singing
pleasantly to amuse himself; apparently satisfied with the mule for the
work he had in mind. The sunshine was bright and comforting; and nothing
disturbed his meditations except the playful sniffing and barking of his
three dogs, Leave-it-lay, Scawl and one-eye Companyun, following at his
heels, hunting out toads and ground-puppies under the newly-broken clods.

At length, the click of the iron latch on the front gate attracted Nat’s
attention; and looking up, he saw a woman with a _marchande_ basket
coming down the grassy path. As she came nearer, Nat recognized Scilla,
coming to buy vegetables to take to the City to sell. She was walking
hurriedly, and seemed to be excited. Before reaching him, she called out
breathlessly:

“Lawd, Unc’ Nat! W’at you reckon done happen?... An’ had to fall on me,
to be de firs’ one to see de thing; an’ go spread de news, yonder in
Gritny.”

Unmoved, Nat looked at her, and answered quietly:

“Ooman, take yo’ time; an’ don’ trip ove’ yo’ words so fas’. W’at
excitement dis is, you done brought hyuh so soon in de mawnin’?”

“Unc’ Nat,” Scilla continued with growing animation, “ain’t you hyeah’d
’bout Tempe gittin’ drownded in de street well, yonder by Miss Collamo
cawnder?”

“Great-day-in-de-mawnin’! gal,” Nat exclaimed. “Is you come hyuh jokin’?
Or is you tellin’ somh’n w’at happen for-true?”

“I ain’ play’n, Unc’ Nat,” Scilla assured him. “Tempe drownded yonder in
de well. An’ nobody ain’ know nothin’ ’tall ’bout it, till I comed along
soon dis mawnin’; an’ seen Tempe body floatin’ on top de water, hol’in a
bunch o’ stingin’-nettles, tight-shet in one ’uh han’s; like she mus’ bin
grabbed ’um off de side de well w’en she was fallin’ in.”

Nat contemplated her face for a second, still doubting the information.
“Gal, go ’way,” he said to her. “I bet you ain’ seen nothin’ but a bunch
o’ weeds, or somh’n-nother floatin’ on top de water, made you think ’twas
Tempe body; dark like it mus’ bin w’en you peeped in de well.”

But Scilla was positive about what she had seen, she told him. Saying
that she had started away from home very early, on her way to Nat’s
garden after vegetables; and seeing the well uncovered when she reached
the corner, and fearing that someone would meet with an accident; she
stooped to cover it. As she was putting the wooden lid in place, a ray
of sunlight, slanting through the opening, attracted her attention to a
strange-looking object in the water. Getting down on her knees to look at
it more closely, she discovered that it was Tempe’s body; with one arm
pointing upward, and the hand clutching a bunch of nettles.

“I was so sk’yeard, Unc’ Nat, I start to run an’ holler for help,” Scilla
went on, with dramatic effect. “W’en jus’ ’bout dat time, I seen Mr.
Gully baker wagon come ’roun de cawnder, an’ I call him to come see.

“Mr. Gully got down off de wagon, an’ looked in de well. An’ w’en he seen
for hisself ’twas Tempe body, he tol’ me go call somebody. So I went got
two or three mens; an’ dey all fetched a rope an’ things from Tempe
yard; an’ dey commence strug’lin wid de rope, till dey got it hitched
roun’ Tempe body. An’ aft’ a li’l w’ile, dey pulled ’uh up.

“Den dey all took Tempe to ’uh house; an’ I went got some wimmins livin’
close-by, to look aft’ ’uh an’ fix ’uh nice for de burryin’.... So aft’
I had did all I could, I lef’ ’um all yonder, an’ come hyuh to git my
vegetables to carry over to New Leens to sell.”

Nat looked at her in thoughtful contemplation.

“Nobody ain’ said nothin’ ’bout how Tempe come to fall in de well?” He
asked her.

“Some de people say ’twas a accident. An’ some say Tempe bin so bad-off
for so long, she was jus’ natchally weak-minded, an’ mus’ bin commit,”
Scilla advised him.

“I gotta go yonder dis evenin’, an’ see ’bout de funeyun,” Nat murmured
softly, as if talking to himself. “Tempe ain’ got nothin’. An’ she bin
too good a ooman to leave dem don’-care-fied niggers lay ’uh away, yonder
in potter’s fiel’.”

“Tempe got life-in-sho-ince, Unc’ Nat,” Scilla informed him. “One de
wimmins foun’ de paper in Tempe berow draw. An’ dey done sont word ’cross
de river to de Met-luh-policy man, to come see ’bout it befo’ dey take
Tempe to de church.”

“Dat ain’ got nothin to do wid me,” Nat answered abruptly. “Dis Tempe
mule you see hitched to dis harrow I’m fol’rin behin’ dis mawnin’. An’
de secon’ payment ain’ made yet; an’ de money still owin’ to ’uh. So Nat
gotta go yonder to Gritny an’ do de right thing; an’ see dat Tempe laid
away like people. Not dumped in a hole like no-count cattle.”

“Dey say dey lookin’ for de Met-luh-policy man to git dah ’bout twelve
o’clock,” Scilla told him. “So Unc’ Nat, if you goin’ take charge de
in-sho-ince money, you better go yonder soon’s you kin.”

Nat looked at her with a scowl of annoyance.

“Gal, stop tellin’ me ’bout de Met-luh-policy man,” he told her, sharply.
“I ain’ got no business wid none o’ Tempe in-sho-ince money. I’m goin’
yonder wid Nat’s money.... Money w’at b’lonks to Tempe, for dis mule you
see stannin’ hyuh.... Money w’at goin’ puhvide de carriage for all dem
niggers to ride in; an’ give Tempe a good-lookin’ funeyun like people....
Da’s w’at Nat goin’ for.”

“Well, I sho wan’ try be dah w’en you come, Unc’ Nat,” Scilla assured
him. “So come on, an’ gimme my vegetables, an’ lemme go yonder an’ sell
’um, an’ git thoo soon’s I kin.”

Scilla selected the vegetables she wanted, arranged them in her basket,
gave Nat the money for them, and put the basket on her head and left. As
soon as she had gone, Nat went back to his work.

“Come on hyuh, ole mule,” he called, taking up the reins from the harrow
and giving the mule a light slap. “You gotta make quick tracks, an’ lemme
git thoo dese las’ few rows. ’Cause I wan’ hurry yonder an’ take Tempe
out de han’s o’ dem searchin’ niggers, befo’ night come.... Git up hyuh,
now. An’ lemme see you move like you un’stan w’at you doin’; an’ got yo’
min’ on w’at Nat talkin’ ’bout.... You hyeah me?”




Carmelite had finished another patch-work master-piece,—a “Jacob ladder”
pattern of many-colored gingham and calico scraps; and being in need
of money, she was giving a “raffle meetin’” at her house. She said she
was sure to “take up five dollars ’munks all de members w’at say dey
was comin’.” Because cold weather was not very far off; and people
never could have too many quilts. And ten cents a chance was so little,
she knew none of the members would overlook the inducement. Besides,
everybody was bound to have a good time at Carmelite’s raffle, “singin’
an’ jokin’ an’ drinkin’ coffee an’ eatin’ cake.” And rich cake, at that.
The same kind Carmelite made for the white folks’ table.

Duck eggs always made a cake taste better, she declared with authority.
They gave it such a fine yellow color; and kept it from looking like
“cheap grocery-sto’ cake.” And Carmelite enjoyed hearing her friends talk
about it; and liked to hear them “give ’uh de praise for ’uh cookin’.”

Nobody’s duck eggs were like Aunt Fisky’s. They were always so big and
fresh. And Carmelite knew that she could get as many as she needed, in
exchange for anything she had to offer. Aunt Fisky was too old to bend
over and beat brick to sprinkle on her floor; and Gussie was so busy
running around with the women, he never had time to stop and sit down and
pound it for her. So a bucket full of brick dust was always a desirable
article of barter. A bundle of fat pine splinters for lighting the fire
was another thing to be desired; scarce as fat pine was most of the time.
And a pan of Carmelite’s hot cornbread, almost as good as the cake she
made, was a thing Aunt Fisky would accept gladly, in exchange for a half
dozen duck eggs.

Having finished nearly all the preparations for the evening raffle,
Carmelite wrapped a newspaper around a pan of hot cornbread just out of
the oven, and started away, after the duck eggs for the cake she was
going to make for her guests. She would hurry back, she told herself; and
the cake would have time to get cool after she finished baking, and it
would “cut nice” for the frolic.

Half way across the green she met Aunt Fisky, driving home her ducks from
the pool of water near her house. It was a wide stretch of ground in the
open green, where the earth had been dug away during high water time,
and carried off and banked against a weak spot in the levee. Being near
the river, the pool was always filled with water and crawfish; and it
became a favorite resort of the ducks, geese and colored children of the
neighborhood.

Coming up near the old woman, Carmelite greeted her with a pleasant
smile, saying:

“Aun’ Fisky, yo’ ducks sho look w’ite an’ healt’y today.”

“Dey ain’ jew to look no yuther way, daughter,” the old woman answered.
“Plut’rin in de water like dey is all day long from soon in de mawnin’.”

“You sho lucky to live so close by de pool out hyuh whah de crawfish
an’ bugs so plennyful,” Carmelite went on. “It keep you from buyin’ a
whole lot o’ cawn an’ things for yo’ ducks. High as chicken feed is dese
days.... Dey sho is a fine flock o’ ducks, for being nothin’ but plain
puddle ducks. Ain’ dey?”

“Yas, daughter. Dey is healt’y an’ nice,” Aunt Fisky answered. “But de
ole ooman gittin’ too feeble to be worry wid raisin’ ducks much longer.
You can’ keep ’um from stray’n off. An’ de crawfish so temptin’ to ’um;
dey looks like dey fo’gits to come back home. So I has to go fetch ’um.
An’ hyuh lately, I bin feelin’ so po’ly, it mos’ plays me out to walk
even fur as dis pool hyuh, ’cross de green.”

“You ain’ got de rheumatism, is you?” Carmelite asked, sympathetically.

“I ain’ sho, daughter,” Aunt Fisky replied, dubiously. “But I bin rubbin’
my back an’ my two knees wid some ni’ntment Unc’ Bendigo gimme; try’n to
see if it goin’ ease de miz’ry. But I ain’ notice no change yet, since
day-befo’-yistiddy.”

“Some kind o’ drug-sto’ n’intment?” Carmelite inquired.

“No. ’Tain’ nothin’ bought,” Aunt Fisky advised her. “Somh’n Unc’ Bendigo
bin makin’ to rub wid, way yonder since Reb-time. Somh’n he say ain’
miss cu’in nobody ever bin use it. An’ so simple, too,” she went on to
explain. “’Tain nothin’ but plain inch-worms out de groun’, mixed wid
chop pa’sley an’ a pinch o’ smokin’ tobacco, fried altogether in hog
lard. An’ you gotta rub wid it in a downwuds direction, to’ads de feet;
so de miz’ry pass out thoo de toes.”

“Sho soun’ like it mus’ be some kin to hoo-doo,” Carmelite remarked,
laughing.

“No it ’tain’,” Aunt Fisky corrected her. “Unc’ Bendigo don’ play wid no
hoo-doo. It des a natchal n’intment he say de ole folks learn ’im how to
make.”

“But w’at good it ’tis, if you say it ain’ help you none?” Carmelite
inquired.

“But how kin I say ’tain no good, if maybe I’m usin’ de thing for somh’n
I ain’ got?” the old woman argued. “I ain’ sho dis no-count feelin’ I got
come from de rheumatism.”

“Maybe yo’ stummic is tight; an’ you needs purgin’,” Carmelite suggested.

“Might be,” agreed Aunt Fisky; opening the gate, and driving the ducks
into the yard.

“Y’oughta eat you a few dese pumma-crissuls you got hyuh in yo’ yard,”
said Carmelite, pointing to a castor oil bush in full fruit, growing
along-side the fence. “Dey sho physic you nice. An’ dey eats good, too.”

Aunt Fisky stood silent, watching the line of ducks marching on to
the back yard. Seeing the newspaper package in Carmelite’s hand, and
guessing the object of her visit, the old woman pushed the door open and
told her to go in.

Carmelite laid the pan of cornbread on the table and sat down, looking
about the room slowly. She was impressed with the clean, orderly poverty
of its furnishing. Save for an old table and two chairs, the place was
almost bare. Some iron pots on the hearth gave evidence that all the
cooking was done in the open fireplace, on the level with the floor, and
greatly in need of repairs.

Aunt Fisky drew a chair from the corner by the chimney and sat down.
Carmelite looked at her without speaking, thinking of her tired old body
and the weary expression on her kindly wrinkled old face. Her guinea-blue
dress was patched in many places, but was clean and carefully ironed. Her
head-handkerchief, once a bright piece of yellow-and-brown plaid gingham,
now old and faded, was tied with care; the two tabs in front drooping
over like a tired butterfly resting after a long flight.

“Daughter, I’m sho glad to set down,” Aunt Fisky sighed, after a brief
silence. “I’m so played-out till I got de swimmin’ in de head.”

“Aun’ Fisky, yo’ stummic mus’ be ain’ workin’ right,” Carmelite advised
her again. “W’at make you don’ take a couple o’ dem pumma-crissul off de
bush you got yonder, an’ eat ’um; an’ see if dey don’ help you? Dey sho
is good w’en somh’n be wrong wid yo’ intwuds.” (Inwards.)

“Daughter, I know de things is good,” Aunt Fisky answered; fully mindful
of Carmelite’s well-meant interest. “But I’m des natchally ’fraid to
meddle wid ’um,” she continued. “Ever since ole Unc’ Jo Mingo died from
eatin’ pumma-crissul seeds off de bush in ’is yard.... I don’ trus’ ’um.
So I don’ wan’ tamper wid ’um.”

“But, Aun’ Fisky, ain’t you b’lieve greed’ness had a whole lot to do
wid Unc’ Jo Mingo death?” Carmelite asked her. “It look to me like
pumma-crissul kilt ’im ’cause he ain’ use no jedgment ’bout eatin’ ’um,”
she went on. “Ain’ sattafy eating two or three seeds, w’en somebody tol’
’im dey was good for certain sickness; had to keep on eatin’ ’um, aft’
he done found out he like de way dey tas’e; till he done et a _whole
han’-full_.... ’Tain no wonder Unc’ Jo Mingo died. Wid all dat castor oil
surgin’ up an’ down ’is body.”

But Aunt Fisky’s judgment was going to be her protection. She knew that
palma Christi seeds were good medicine. She had heard the white folks
talk about it, she told Carmelite. But she was afraid to meddle with
them, and would rather use some remedy she knew better. Okra seed tea was
just as good; and she would try a dose of that, if old Uncle Bendigo’s
ointment didn’t bring relief after a few days more.

Carmelite advised her to be careful about what she ate; and seized the
occasion to call her attention to the pan of corn-bread. Aunt Fisky got
up and unwrapped the present; thanked Carmelite for her thoughtfulness,
and asked her if she needed any eggs. Carmelite told her about the raffle
she was giving; and said she wanted to bake a cake, and would take a half
dozen duck eggs, if Aunt Fisky could spare them.

The old woman brought the eggs from the next room; and after turning the
cornbread out on the table, she put the eggs in Carmelite’s pan, and sat
down again for a chat.

“Do Gussie know anything ’bout de raffle at yo’ house to-night?” Aunt
Fisky inquired.

Carmelite hesitated slightly, uncertain what to answer.

“Gussie ’tenshun don’ run to’ads quilts, Aun’ Fisky. An’ da’s de reason
I ain’ say nothin’ to ’im,” she apologized. “An’ innyway, de raffle ain’
goin’ las’ long. ’Cause you know, evvybody goin’ straight from my house,
yonder to Tempe wake at de New Hope church.... An’ I ’spec Gussie goin’
too.”

“You done de right thing to leave Gussie out,” Aunt Fisky told her.
“Gussie ain’ fit to go no place; all time drunk, like he bin lately. I
dunno w’at Gussie comin’ to. Runnin’ wid loose wimmins; an’ squand’in ’is
money, gamblin’; an’ goin’ on reckless like he doin’. Much as I bin tried
to raise ’im right. An’ done for ’im same’s he was my own chile an’ my
own color.”

“Might be Gussie goin’ make up ’is min’ an’ marry Cindy, an’ settle down
steady; now she done had a chile by ’im,” Carmelite suggested.

“None de yuther mens bin had chillun by Cindy ain’ thought nothin’
’bout marryin’ Cindy, is dey?” inquired the old woman, with a knowing
smile. “Who wan’ marry Cindy, trashy as she done made ’uhself all over
Gritny?... I hyeah dem young boys say: w’en dey see Cindy comin’ long de
banquette, dey crosses over to de yuther side de street, to git out ’uh
way. ’Cause dey say, all Cindy got to do w’en she git close to you: des
look at you _hard_, an’ she have a chile by you befo’ you know it.”

Carmelite laughed heartily at the comment, saying that people could
talk as much as they pleased; but Cindy didn’t pay no mind to what
they said about her, “good as she felt wid all dat fam’ly o’ gitlets”
(illegitimates) to take care of her when they grew up big enough to work.

But Aunt Fisky said she didn’t agree with Cindy. Cindy was saying the
wrong thing. Children changed when they grew up. They forgot all about
the old folks. They clean forgot all their parents did for them, when
they were crawling around helpless. And when they reached the time of
their younger youth, and you had to give them every kind of ’tention.
Then, after they all growed big enough to be some benefit, they turned
their back on the old folks, and went off and left them sitting high and
dry, waiting on the Lawd to provide for them.

Look at Gussie. How much money did he bring in the house to keep things
going? The few stingy dimes he put in her hand didn’t even pay for the
washing and patching of his clothes.—Let alone all the cooking she had
to do for him. But what did he care? Long as he knew she had her ducks
to count on; and the few butterbeans and red peppers in the garden, she
could always sell to the white folks; he wasn’t going to worry about her
comfort.

“Who? Don’ tell me nothin’ ’bout raisin’ chillun to be a sattafaction to
you w’en you git ole,” she ended with emphasis; Carmelite nodding her
head with perfect understanding.

Maybe Aunt Fisky was too easy-going, Carmelite told her. She ought to
shame Gussie. And not let him walk over her, long as he was staying under
her roof free. She ought to turn him out-doors, and shame him good, and
force him to show her the right respect.

“But daughter, don’t you know Gussie ain’ no _nigger_, like you an’ me?”
Aunt Fisky reminded her. “How you expec’ me to try an’ shame Gussie, an’
make ’im know he ain’ doin’ de right thing?... Gussie ain’ got no nigger
feelin’s.... Gussie a _w’ite_ man. An’ he know it, too. So how kin I
change Gussie natchal ways?”

Carmelite moved on her chair uneasily, and began to speak with sudden
vehemence.

“Gussie ain’ _good_ as a nigger!” she declared, stressing every word
as she spoke. “Bin livin’ munks niggers all dese years, an’ now try’n
to play proud wid _you_, an’ ain’ got nothin’ substanshun to back ’im
up?... Lookin’ down on you, ole as you is; an’ de onles mother Gussie
ever knowed?... Gawd knows, Aun’ Fisky, you too tender-hearted. You ain’
owin’ nothin’ to Gussie no longer; now he done growed up, an’ plenny able
to take care ’imself.... You done paid ’im evvything.... Who?... Gussie
lucky he ain’ had me to deal wid. ’Cause I sho would-a turned ’im out in
de street long time ago; w’ite or no w’ite.”

Aunt Fisky couldn’t do that, she told Carmelite. It wouldn’t be right. It
would be breaking the promise she made with dead people; when Gussie’s
mother gave her the poor, fatherless child to raise. And besides, Gussie
had nobody but her to turn to. No matter how mean he was, she couldn’t go
back on him. Carmelite knew good as she did that the white folks wouldn’t
recognize him.

“An’ I know good, none us niggers ain’ goin’ cunsider claimin’ ’im,”
Carmelite declared with positive conviction.

“An’ da’s de very reason make me stick to Gussie like I do,” Aunt Fisky
assured her with simple loyalty.

“Ole folks sho is strange,” Carmelite commented, shaking her head, and
wondering at the old woman’s questionable sense of duty.

Yes. Old folks did a heap of things that young folks couldn’t understand;
she told Carmelite. But she was going to do the best she could for
Gussie, as long as she lived. And if he came to a bad end, she wouldn’t
have anything to blame herself for. She was willing to leave it all in
the hands of the Lawd. Gussie would wake up some day in his right mind;
when Gawd put His finger on him and stopped him in his tracks. Carmelite
would see. Just wait.

“Maybe so,” Carmelite faltered, dubiously, getting up from her chair and
making ready to leave. “But I sho don’ wan’ see ole no-manners Gussie
come lopin’ up in my house tonight,” she went on; taking the pan of eggs
from the table and walking towards the door. “If he know w’at good for
’im, he better stay ’way.... So I’m goin’ leave you now; an’ go yonder
an’ bake my cake.... An’ I’m goin’ pick you two lucky numbers, Aun’
Fisky; an’ see’f I can’ make you win de quilt. You heah?” she added in a
cheerful tone, as she walked away; leaving the old woman standing in the
doorway, looking pensively across the green.




Despite the fact of Nookie’s being a sort of local joke, on account of
the peculiar clothes she often wore; there were a few colored sisters
of the East Green who showed genuine respect for her ability as a
dress-maker. They spoke of her as a “natchal bawn seamster,” when it
came to transforming antique gowns and “gabbarellas” donated by the
white folks. And she certainly knew how to make clothes “come to fit fat
people fine”.... Who? “Nookie sho could play wid a needle an’ thread
an’ scissors.” Nobody ever need be afraid of getting a dress from Nookie
that would make her look like she had a “low back an’ a high belly.” No
indeed. Nookie was a “p’yo fashion-plate” for making over old clothes.
And cheap, too; ’long-side the “boughten clo’se from the dry-goods sto’.”

Eager to live up to this hard-earned reputation, and pleased with the
thought of being conspicuous at Carmelite’s raffle, among the critical
sisters of the East Green, Nookie made herself a new dress for the
occasion. She had just finished the clever contrivance; which, being
creased and wrinkled from many alterations, had to be pressed before it
could be worn.

Finding that she had no charcoal to make a fire in the furnace, she
decided to run over to Soongy’s house and press it there. Soongy was
going to the raffle; and Nookie was sure that she would be ironing
something for herself to wear that night. So putting the dress in a
market basket, Nookie started off across the green, humming softly as she
hurried along.

When she came to Soongy’s house, the gate was open; and the sound of
singing inside told her that someone was at home. There were two voices
singing, and the sound was cheerful and pleasant. Nookie recognized the
voices of Soongy and Dink. There was no need to call. They wouldn’t hear.
She would walk right in.

Going into the kitchen, she found Soongy at work at the ironing-board,
pressing a voluminous, well-starched petticoat; an old faded curtain
spread on the floor under the board to keep the trailing garment from
getting soiled.

Dink was standing at the kitchen table, washing dishes; naked as though
he had just emerged from the bath. Both of them were singing in unison,
tranquilly happy; and apparently oblivious to each other’s presence.

Nookie stood in speechless amazement for a few seconds, wondering at
the unusual spectacle; neither of the singers having noticed her quiet
entrance. At length she exclaimed:

“In de name o’ Gawd, Soongy! W’at kind o’ fashion dis is, y’all got hyuh?
Stannin’ hyuh oncuncern’ singin’ Gawd praise; an’ Dink purradin’ in
front you naked as a black snake. None y’all ain’ feel shame?... Boy, go
yonder an’ wrap somh’n ’round yo’ middle, befo’ you come facin’ people so
haphazzud,—big as you is!”

Not waiting to hear all of Nookie’s speech, Dink ran into the next room,
laughing heartily. Soongy continued to slide her iron back and forth over
the petticoat on the board, unperturbed. Looking at Nookie, she said
casually:

“Nookie, you sho know how to come up on people easy. W’at make you ain’
call, so somebody kin know you comin’?”

“W’at good callin’ goin’ do?” Nookie asked her. “You an’ Dink up in hyuh
together, singin’ so boist’ous? Wid yo’ min’ workin’ so heavy on dat
i’nin-boad; I reckon you ain’ took time to notice Dink walkin’ ’roun hyuh
in ’is naked skin, till I had to call yo’ ’tenshun to it. Is you?”

With calm politeness, Soongy said:

“Nookie, you ain’ got to gimme no egvice cuncernin’ Dink. I know de boy
was naked. An’ he know he gotta stay naked, too. ’Till I git good an’
ready to give ’im ’is clo’se, from whah I done hid ’um.”

Nookie looked puzzled.

“W’at you mean?” she inquired. “Da’s de way you punishes Dink to make ’im
stay in-do’s?”

“Da’s de onles way I know how to keep Dink from goin’ yonder in de swamp,
play’n munks dem shoe-pick ditches,” Soongy went on to explain. “Times
an’ times, I done tol’ Dink I don’ never eat no nasty shoe-pick. But he
so hard-head. He steal off evvy chance he git; an’ go yonder in de swamp,
wid Mahaley chillun an’ some dem yuther hongry li’l A-rabs from down de
street. Comin’ back hyuh at night, wid a sack full o’ dirty ole shoe-pick
feesh; expec’in me to cook ’um.... Like he ain’ never bin use to nothin’
’tall good to eat.”

Nookie looked at her with a feeling of mingled disappointment and
disgust. Was Soongy trying to put on airs with her, and make believe she
didn’t eat tchoupique? A fish she was raised on; like all the other poor
colored folks living close to the swamp. A fish so fat and greasy, and
so plentiful in all the muddy bayous and ditches, that everybody called
it “Gawd’s feesh.” Something Gawd provided for His nigger people, to
keep them in food when everything else failed. A fish that all the swamp
niggers caught in the long summer time, and cut up and salted and dried
in the sun; and hung up in their kitchens to last through the winter,
when they couldn’t afford to buy fresh meat. And you didn’t have to catch
them with a line, like you did other fish, either. All the children had
to do when they went to the tchoupique pond: take a flour barrel, and
knock out the two heads. Then, just “plump” it down in the water hard.
And you never missed having ’most a barrel half-full, ready to scoop up
with your hands, and throw out on the bank.

Thinking of the unctuous court-bouillon and tchoupique stew she knew how
to make, Nookie asked:

“Soongy, you say you don’ eat shoe-pick?”

“Who?” answered Soongy, with a superior air. “I jus’ as soon eat
lamp-eel, as eat dat nasty slimy mud feesh. No ’ndeed, not me.”

“I eats ’um, Miss Nookie,” sounded Dink’s pleasant announcement, as he
came in from the next room; a pillow slip tied around his middle with a
string.

He went over to the table quietly and began washing the dishes. Soongy
looked at him crossly, and shouted:

“Boy! W’at in de name o’ Gawd you mean? Takin’ my nice clean pilluh slip
off de bed, to splash it all up wid greasy dish water?... Go yonder in
de room, an’ take dat pilluh slip off yo’ black body, an’ put it back
whah it b’lonks; befo’ I stomps bofe yo’ livers down an’ beats you
speechless!... You hyeah me?”

Dink looked at her appealingly and left the room.

“W’at make you don’ leave de boy put on ’is clo’se, Soongy?” Nookie
asked, rebukingly. “Ain’ he gotta go yonder to Carmelite house wid you
tonight, to play de comb an’ make music for de raffle?”

“You leave Dink be,” Soongy advised her, curtly. “Dink got plenny time
to put on ’is clo’se befo’ he go to Carmelite house. Dis now. Tonight
ain’ come yet.”

Not being in sympathy with Soongy’s views, Nookie was ready to argue in
Dink’s behalf.

“Soongy, w’at make you wan’ be so hard on Dink like you is; w’en all he
doin’, is try’n to be decen’?” She asked. “You think mo’ ’bout yo’ pilluh
slip gittin’ spoilt, den you does ’bout de boy ketchin’ ’is death o’
col’; runnin’ ’roun hyuh in ’is naked skin, wid all dis draf’ searchin’
over ’is body. You sho oughta be ’shame’.”

Soongy looked up from her ironing, and answered impatiently:

“Dink ain’ fraid no draf’ blowin’ ove’ ’im, out yonder in de swamp wid
dem chillun; w’en he pull off ’is clo’se an’ jump in de ditch wid a ba’l
to ketch shoe-pick, is he?... An’ inny-way, you ain’ need to gimme no
egvice ’bout Dink,” she went on, with animation. “If da’s all you come
hyuh for,—to raise de subjec’ cuncernin’ w’at I has to do wid Dink; you
gotta ’scuze me if I tell you, you welcome to go back home de same way
you come hyuh. An’ no hard feelin’s, either.”

“I ain’ come hyuh to meddle you,” Nookie apologized. “I come hyuh to
press dis dress I wan’ wear to Carmelite raffle tonight. I ain’ had no
charcoal to my house, an’ I say you mus’ bin had fire in de funnish; so
I took my dress an’ come hyuh to do my pressin’.... But you ain’ mind, is
you?” She asked, falteringly.

“De i’ons an’ de fire an’ de funnish all hyuh. An’ you kin press as much
as you please,” Soongy answered; putting her work aside and clearing the
board for Nookie. “I ain’ min’ nothin’. ’Cep w’en people try to make me
feel cheap befo’ chillun,” she went on. “Wan’ make me think I gotta eat
shoe-pick, jus’ ’cause Dink bring ’um hyuh an’ ax me to cook ’um.”

Nookie laughed pleasantly, and said:

“Soongy, nobody ain’ wan’ fo’ce you to eat shoe-pick if you scawns ’um so
critical. Nex’ time Dink bring a mess o’ feesh home, you jes’ sen’ ’um
roun’ to my house; an’ I bet I show you how to perish ’um. Who? I’m a
plum fool w’en it come to mixin’-up shoe-pick an’ tomattusus an’ seas’nin
an’ things.... An’ Dink, you kin fill up yo’ plate many time as you
want,” she called to him, in his hiding place. “So bring de things roun’
to me, you hyeah?”

The sound of Dink’s pleased giggle echoed from the next room, and Soongy
said to Nookie, loud enough for Dink to hear:

“Come on hyuh, Nookie, an’ git thoo pressin’ yo’ dress, an’ go home an’
lemme straighten up hyuh. An’ stop puttin’ devilment in dat boy head....
Nex’ time Dink go yonder ketchin’ shoe-pick, I lay I’m goin’ fix ’im so,
he go naked till de Lawd has to take pity on ’im, an’ give ’im clo’se to
put on. I sho Gawd will. If I has to burn evvy scat’rin rag he got to ’is
name.”

Nookie walked over to the furnace, and taking one of the irons from the
fire, she spat on it to test the heat. As she began pressing her dress,
she said:

“Soongy, you ain’ foolish, no. Good as you know how to make b’lieve you
is.”

Ignoring the remark, Soongy went to the table and fell to washing the
dishes which Dink left in the pan. Very soon, song took the place of
conversation; and the two women worked on, singing cheerfully over their
tasks. Now and then the wavering sound of Dink’s voice came from the next
room, like a broken response.

Nookie finished pressing her dress, folded it carefully, and put it in
the basket, making ready to go.

“Now I’m goin’ yonder to my house, an’ lay down till dis evenin’,” she
said to Soongy, after thanking her for the use of her charcoal and irons.
“An’ watch how you goin’ see me strut in dis new frock tonight, w’en I
git to Carmelite house, in front all dem people say dey comin’,” she
called back as she walked out. “An’ leave Dink put on ’is clo’se, so he
kin come soon an’ play music on de comb, an’ make dem niggers feel good
befo’ dey go yonder to Tempe wake.”

The prolonged quiet in the next room seemed to tell Soongy that Dink
had fallen asleep. As soon as Nookie had gone, Soongy called to him
commandingly:

“Boy! You better come in dis kitchen an’ wipe dese dishes, an’ help me
straighten-up dis room, befo’ you commence thinkin’ ’bout puttin’ on inny
clo’se to go ’way from hyuh tonight. You hyeah me?”




All afternoon fast-moving banks of dark threatening clouds were hovering
over the East Green, and with the coming of evening the rain began
falling in torrents. Gussie had just finished his supper of cornbread and
coffee before the open fireplace, and was sitting watching the puffs of
smoke the wind blew down the chimney, and listening to the pelting sound
of the rain on the old shingle roof. He wondered how he would be able to
go out if the rain continued; remembering that it was the night he had to
help old man Hooblitz with his sausage-making. Rain or no rain, he had
to go. Because his word was his bond; and he knew that the old man would
expect him.

Aunt Fisky was sitting by the table, patching one of Gussie’s old
cottonade shirts by the dim light of a flickering candle. She saw him
get up and go to the door and look out, and knew by his manner that he
was impatient to get away. She felt that it would be useless to try and
hinder him. It would only make him cross.

Putting on his hat and coat, he told her good night and started off in
the rain. He would go to Mr. Cholly Groos’s and get a cup of lemon-gin
first, he told himself; then go down to old man Hooblitz’s and hurry and
get through; and after that “go by an’ peep in at Carmelite’s raffle for
a w’ile.” And after that, go to the church and sing over Tempe till he
got tired. Then, after a full night of varied pleasures, he would go home
to Aunt Fisky, and “lay down, an’ sleep de sleep o’ de sattafied.”

This singular old German with the effervescent name, was a woodcutter
by day; who, requiring extra funds for the desired supply of beer and
whiskey for selfish consumption, against swamp-fever, snake-bites and
such-like evils, managed to overcome the need by following the craft
of sausage-making at night. His retired laboratory was a small shanty
on the edge of Ziffle’s Wood, adjoining the cemetery. Hooblitz cut down
the trees for Mr. Ziffle, who furnished the villagers with cord wood for
their cook stoves and fireplaces.

Owing to a series of harsh disagreements with his married daughter who
thought not highly of her father’s spectacular inebriety; old Hooblitz
lived alone at his sausage factory on Mr. Ziffle’s property. Occasionally
Gussie went to help him with the sausage-making; often spending the night
with him, and taking part in his deep potations and raucous revelling;
when only the owls in the cypress trees and the bullfrogs in the near-by
canal would be annoyed by the seeming rivalry.

Strictly speaking, the place where the sausage was made could not be
called a room. It was nothing more than a tin roof supported by four
posts, young cypress trees with the bark on. The floor was of mud, baked
hard from the fire that burned in the center three nights of each week.
Over the fire was a large three-legged cauldron, with a brick under each
foot. In it was boiled the mixture he peddled in a basket, going about
in the evening from door to door; no distinction being made between his
white and colored patrons.

Adjoining the place where he worked,—fastened on like a casual
after-thought, was the room in which he slept. Its furnishings consisted
of a rude bunk nailed to the wall; a long cypress tool chest resting on
a pair of tressels; a soap box and a beer keg, to serve the purpose of
chairs for any chance visitors. By way of decoration, the walls were hung
with old hats, coats and trousers; here and there, odd pieces of red
flannel shirts and underwear adding a redeeming note of cheer to the dull
squalor of the place. The most striking thing, however, was an array of
empty flasks and bottles (eloquent reminders of the revels of the past)
hanging by strings from the rafters overhead.

For a long time Mr. Ziffle had the feeling that his woodpiles were
being rifled, gently but systematically. He discussed the fact with old
Hooblitz, who, not only gave vent to friendly indignation; but expressed
his willingness to act as night-watchman and shoot the unworthy rogue,
regardless of caste or color.

But his enthusiasm did not succeed in removing suspicion from Mr.
Ziffle’s mind. He was convinced that Hooblitz was the crafty pilferer. So
he determined to put the matter to a test. Whereupon he took a dozen or
more sticks of wood and bored them full of gimlet holes; into which he
poured a small quantity of gunpowder, plugging them up afterward. Then he
placed the loaded cord sticks on the tops of the various woodpiles, and
sat down patiently to wait results.

The night set in with a driving rain, just as old Hooblitz lighted his
fire and filled the big iron pot with the ingredients for the unsanitary
brew he would peddle as sausage. Looking at his supply of wood, he saw
there was not enough to finish the boiling, and that he would have to pay
a secret visit to Mr. Ziffle’s woodpile to get a few sticks to last the
night. He was just about to go out, when the door flew open suddenly, and
Gussie lunged into the room, dripping wet and blowing like a porpoise.

Displeased with the untimely interruption, and not wanting Gussie to find
out the secret of his wood supply, knowing that he would speak of it in
the village and Mr. Ziffle would hear it eventually; old Hooblitz stood
looking at the unwelcome visitor, leering at his discomfort with a sort
of malicious delight. Gussie sat down dejectedly on the beer keg, beating
his wet cap against its side. The old man continued to laugh, wondering
at the same time how long he would have to wait before going about his
work. Getting up slowly, Gussie shook himself several times, like a wet
dog trying to dry himself.

“Gawd knows, Mr. Hooblitz,” he began to complain, “I ain’ see w’at you
got to laugh at. If I had knowed ’twas goin’ rain like dis, I sho would
’a stayed ’way from hyuh tonight.... You ain’ goin’ make no sausage, bad
weather like dis, is you?”

’Twasn’t raining on the inside; the old man told him curtly. He didn’t
have to stay, if he wanted to go back home; the old man went on. He got
along without help before; he could get along without it again. Little
bit of rain didn’t make him afraid to work for an honest living. The
house had a roof over it. And there was a good fire, in the bargain.

“Li’l bit o’ rain!” Gussie exclaimed; surprised at his disagreeable
manner of talking. “Man, you ain’ seen de water fallin’ out-do’as, if you
wan’ call dat a li’l bit o’ rain.... Look how I’m soaked clean thoo to de
skin, if you ain’ b’lieve w’at I’m tellin’ you.”

“Well, w’at you want me to do?” The old man asked indifferently, with a
flat harsh drawl.

“Gimme li’l somh’n to drink,” Gussie told him frankly. “Li’l somh’n to
warm me up befo’ I start ’way from hyuh. ’Cause I ain’ goin’ stay wid
you an’ do no work tonight.... I done already seen whah you too cross
an’ crabby for me to stay hyuh an’ play ’roun’ dis sausage pot. Wet as I
done got comin’ ’way down hyuh in de woods for nothin’.... An’ inny-way,
I got to go yonder to Carmelite raffle an’ see’f I can’ win’ one dem
quilts for Aun’ Fisky.... An’ got to go yonder to Tempe wake, too.... So
gimme a drink o’ somh’n-nother, Mr. Hooblitz, so I kin leave hyuh w’en it
slack-up rainin’ a li’l bit out-do’as.”

The old man took a flask from his pocket, and holding it out to Gussie,
said roughly:

“Here. Take a drink. An’ I hope it lands you in Hell before morning....
An’ hurry on back to your damn niggers; if that’s what you want to do. I
reckon I kin git along good enough by myself.”

Gussie looked at the flask; then contemplated the old man’s face for a
second before answering.

“But no, Mr. Hooblitz. You sho is cross tonight.... W’as de matter? You
begrudge me a li’l bit o’ licker to keep me from ketchin’ col’, wet as
I’m is? An’ come hyuh to help you, too?... Hyuh, take yo’ licker back,”
he went on, holding out the flask to the old man. “I ain’ got to drink
it, if da’s de way you wan’ talk. Frien’ly as me an’ you bin for so long.”

Old Hooblitz took the flask, and after helping himself to a long swig,
he handed it back to Gussie, saying:

“Don’t be so damn touchy about your niggers. Take your drink, an’ go on
back to ’um. You might miss the excitement if you stay here too long.”

Gussie put the flask to his mouth and took a long pull. He handed it back
and the old man put it in his pocket and sat down sullenly. Gussie shook
himself in his wet clothes, put on his cap, buttoned his coat well about
his neck, and started for the door. He looked out to see if the rain had
abated.

“’Tain drappin’ so hard like it ’twas,” he said, turning to the old man.
“But ’tain no use stay’n hyuh no longer. So Mr. Hooblitz, I’m goin’ tell
you good-night.”

The old man made an inarticulate grunt as Gussie left, calling to him as
the door closed:

“Damn you an’ your good-night! I don’t care if I never see you no more.”

Going over to the bunk, he lifted the straw mattress and brought out a
quart bottle of whiskey. He filled the empty flask he had in his pocket,
took a generous gulp, put the flask back, and looked out at the weather.

The rain was falling in torrents.

He would have to go out after the wood, as the fire was burning very
low. Going over to the array of clothing on the wall, he took an old
coat from the peg, threw it over his shoulders and started out in search
of the woodpile. After stumbling through the dark, he came back after a
while with four sticks of wood, his clothing thoroughly drenched.

“A good dram’ll warm up the inside, an’ I’ll be dry in no time,” he said
to reassure himself, lifting his flask and drinking heartily. Then he
raked the fire together and put on two sticks of wood, and went into his
room to lie down until the cooking required further attention.

The rain pelted on the tin roof of the shed and the ringing sound went
echoing through the room like a savage serenade. The malodorous fumes
of the boiling pot also went into the room, bringing him visions of
profitable sales and more comforting flasks for the lonely nights to
follow. The thought made him happy, so he took another long drink of
thankfulness; closing his eyes so as not to be shocked by the dismal
aspect of an empty bottle.

The rain rattled and the fire cracked, but nothing disturbed the pleasure
of his dreaming. The pot gurgled and the fire cracked louder than before,
but the rude noise failed to penetrate the chaotic lethargy that wrapped
his maudlin mind.

Suddenly the gunpowder exploded, sending the loaded cord sticks flying
in every direction; the seething pot soaring into the air against the
tin roof, rattling like a charge of light artillery; the heterogeneous
contents, scattered to the four winds like the spoils of battle.

But old Hooblitz heard no sound. No hint of the loud catastrophe. He
lay unmoved on his dingy bed, wrapped in a fringe of bibulous ecstasy;
half-hidden in the reek of steam that filled the room; oblivious to all
mundane things; until the coming of morning confronted him with the cruel
truth, and the accusing presence of Mr. Ziffle, asking if he was ready to
deliver the culprit to justice.




Gussie went stumbling along the muddy street through the rain, wondering
how soon he would come to a shed under which he could take momentary
shelter. The nearest one was Mr. Honnus’s bar-room. He could see the
pale gleam of lamplight reaching out across the street in the distance,
but the welcome reflection was still several blocks away. He hurried on,
quarreling with himself for going on such a wild goose chase, and cursing
old Hooblitz for sending him off in the rain with so little consideration.

When he reached Mr. Honnus’s shed, he sat down on the door-step,
deliberating whether to go in and have a drink to warm him up; or to
continue right on to Carmelite’s house and dry his clothes by her kitchen
stove before the raffle started.

He came to a decision without long delay. The bar-room door opened, and
Chicken-Volsin coming out, Gussie had to get up to let him pass. Seeing
Gussie’s wretched condition, Chicken-Volsin exclaimed:

“Great Gawd, man! Whah you come from? You look like somebody bin wollin’
in de ditch.... Come inside wid me an’ git somh’n to drink.”

“Sho Gawd will,” Gussie answered, well-pleased. “’Cause I feel like I’m
’bout to git de chills; wid all dis col’ rain searchin’ ’round my body.”

“Whah in de name o’ Gawd you bin, Gussie?” Volsin asked in amazement;
walking over to the bar and calling for whiskey.

Gussie gave him a brief account of his useless journey to old Hooblitz’
place; the unfriendly manner in which he had been treated; and his
determination to get to Carmelite’s raffle that night, rain or no rain.
Anybody that had a spare dime could go and take a chance. And he had his
mind set on winning one of Carmelite’s quilts for Aunt Fisky; so he would
go, if he had to swim there.

Chicken-Volsin tried to shame him about his appearance, but Gussie
assured him that he could sit by Carmelite’s stove and dry out before he
went in the front room “munks de people.”

“Some mens sho is foolish ’bout goin’ wid wimmins,” Volsin twitted.

“’Tain’ de wimmins takin’ me to Carmelite house,” Gussie explained. “It’s
dem quilts she rafflin’.... I ain’ give Aun’ Fisky nothin’ for so long,
I wan’ bring ’uh home somh’n nice to make up for it.... An’ two or three
dimes ain’ goin’ break nobody. So da’s w’at I’m goin’ for.”

Chicken-Volsin accepted the excuse without further comment, and offered
him another friendly drink. Gussie swallowed the whiskey with relish, and
seeming to have forgotten his discomfort, started to go.

Chicken-Volsin walked to the door with him and saw him go out in the
rain. He stood watching him running across the street, and laughed to
think what a fool Gussie was, exposing himself to such weather “for
nothin’ but one li’l ole raggedy quilt.”

On reaching Carmelite’s house, Gussie pushed the gate open hurriedly, and
ran up the steps, stamping his feet loudly on the gallery, trying to dry
them. Carmelite was in the kitchen, and hearing the strange noise, she
came out to see who had arrived. As she entered the room, the front door
flew open unceremoniously, and she saw Gussie lunge into the room; his
shoes covered with mud, and rillets of water running from his clothing
and dripping from his cap, all over her neat, well-scrubbed floor.

She looked at him, filled with consternation, struggling for appropriate
speech.

“Look! ole ugly w’ite nigger.... Is you done los’ yo’ good mind?” She
almost shouted. “W’at you _mean_, comin’ up in my house dis-away?...
Wettin’ up all my funnuchuh, an’ trackin’ dirt all ove’ my nice clean
flo’ wid yo’ big ole muddy shoes?... _Git_ out o’ hyuh an’ go whah you
b’long!... Nobody ain’ ax you to come hyuh, no-how.”

“Carmelite, don’ holluh at me like dat,” Gussie appealed to her quietly.
“Lemme git to de kitchen an’ set by de stove, an’ git dry befo’ people
start to come an’ ketch me lookin’ like dis.... Mizabul as you see me
hyuh, wid all dese wet clo’se on.”

“_Who?_” Carmelite shouted with indignation. “You ain’ think you goin’
stay hyuh tonight an’ go munks people, trampy-lookin’ an’ lavadated as
you is?... Who?... Gussie, you mus’ be a fool!... So you better make up
yo’ min’ to go ’way from hyuh right now; an’ no mo’ talkin’ ’bout it....
You hyeah w’at I say?”

Gussie looked at her dejectedly, wondering whether to go or stay. He
tried to reason with her, telling her that he only wanted to get dry
before going out again; that was all. She wouldn’ have the heart to turn
him out in the rain, after he came all the way from the woods to take
a few chances just to help her out? Nobody would turn a dog out-doors
a night like that. He wouldn’ bother anybody out in the kitchen all by
himself. Who would care anything about him, as long as they were having a
good time in the front of the house?

Taking a half dollar out of his pocket, he held it out to Carmelite
saying:

“Hyuh; take dis fo’-bits, an’ pick some good numbers, an’ see’f you can’
win de quilt for me; so I kin take it yonder to Aun’ Fisky.”

Carmelite took the coin without a demur. It was an unexpected
ameliorating charm. A welcome token of truce.

“Come on out hyuh an’ set to de stove; so I kin hurry up an’ wipe dese
tracks off dis flo’ befo’ innybody git hyuh,” Carmelite said in a quiet
voice, starting for the kitchen with Gussie following her. “An’ ’tain no
pity for _you_ make me change my min’; no,” she went on. “If ’twasn’ say
I know Aun’ Fisky so long; an’ know w’at she got to put up wid; I _sho_
would make you take de road tonight; brazen as you is, comin’ hyuh like
dis.”

Gussie pulled a chair close to the stove and sat down; glad to get where
it was warm, and thankful to be under shelter at last. Carmelite took
a floor-cloth from behind the door and went to the front room to wipe
up the mud tracks from Gussie’s shoes. After a while she came back; and
seeing Gussie looking at the coffee pot on the stove, she said:

“I’m goin’ give you a cup o’ coffee; an’ you stay hyuh an’ drink it. An’
don’t you come to de front w’en people git hyuh, an’ de raffle be goin’
on in yonder. You hyeah?”

Gussie told her that he would stay in the kitchen. All he wanted was to
get dry. And maybe after he drank his coffee, he would go to sleep for a
little while, before he passed by Tempe’s wake, on his way home.

“Well, you stay hyuh in de kitchen,” Carmelite reminded him. “An’ if inny
one yo’ numbers draw de quilt, I’ll fetch it out hyuh to you.”

She poured a cup of coffee and placed it on the apron of the stove for
him. Hearing voices at the front, she went to look after her guests;
leaving Gussie to take his enjoyment as he felt inclined.

When Carmelite came into the room, Scilla was standing in the middle
of the floor unpinning herself from the folds of an old gray blanket.
Mozella was sitting in the rocking-chair, wiping her bare feet with a
towel, and making ready to put on her shoes and stockings, which she had
carried in her hand. Pinkey was leaning against the door, hesitating to
come in, for fear of leaving mud tracks on the floor.

“Gawd knows, Carmelite,” she remarked half-regretfully, “you sho picked
out a nasty night to make people come ’way from home, an’ bring a whole
lot o’ mud an’ confusion in yo’ house,—jus’ for one quilt.”

Carmelite gave an unconcerned laugh and told her not to worry about the
mud. She had plenty of rags and soap to clean it up tomorrow. She wasn’t
too old and feeble to get down on her two knees to scrub. ’Specially
after people had come so well-meanin’ to help her make a few dimes, to
pay for all the sewin’ she put on that nice Jacob-ladder quilt she was
goin’ leave ’um to view later on. No indeed.... A little bit of mud
tracks wouldn’t upset her, if the crowd was goin’ to be plennyful.

Keziah came in, followed by Frozine who was carrying a lantern; her skirt
tucked up above her knees; her white stockings and battered pair of
loose-fitting men’s shoes giving her a most ludicrous appearance.

Soongy and Lethe were sitting in the corner, staring at her in amused
silence. Dink was standing across the room, looking at her with his hand
over his mouth, struggling to keep back a convulsive outbreak.

Carmelite went to take the lantern from Frozine, saying:

“Frozine, you come clean from home all thoo de street like dis? Wid a
lantun shinin’ ginse yo’ laigs so brazen? Callin’ people tenshun to you,
crittacul-lookin’ as you is?”

Who? Frozine remarked with a fine indifference. She didn’t have people
to study about.... She didn’t play with mud in the day-time; so she knew
good and well that she wasn’t going to take no chances with any Gritny
mud in the night-time.... Fallin’ down in the dark and wreckin’ herself,
without a lantern.... No indeed.... People laughin’ didn’t worry her.
They could laugh at her legs as much as they pleased. Laughin’ couldn’t
hurt her feelings.... But she sure Gawd was going to look to keep her
legs from getting hurt.... Yes indeed.... Because she had too many things
she had to do, before she “runned up on a accident an’ come to be a
cripple befo’ her time.”

“Hyuh Bennee done come, Carmelite. An’ got Duckery wid ’im, too,” Soongy
called to her as she went back with Frozine’s lantern.

The two young men came in smiling to everyone present, and the buzz of
conversation and merry laughter began to fill the room.

Carmelite came back with the Jacob-ladder quilt and spread it over a
chair for examination. The women commented on the bright colors, and
admired the beauty of the pattern, and praised Carmelite for the fine
work she had done. Carmelite thanked them for coming, and told them she
wanted everybody to have a good time.

“How long y’all expec’in to stay hyuh?” Duckery asked with playful
impatience. “You goin’ stay hyuh all night an’ cackle like a passul o’
guinea-hens?... Done forgot ’bout Tempe waitin’ for y’all to do some
singin’ ove’ ’uh, yonder to de church?... Y’all better git started an’ do
w’at you wan’ do; if you wan’ git finish an’ go to inny wake tonight.”

“Das jus’ w’at I say, Duckery. You sho right,” Soongy agreed. “W’at
Carmelite waitin’ for, innyway? Maybe de bad weather keepin’ de members
from comin’.... Look to me like dey got enough hyuh already to go ’head
wid de intuhprize.... Evvybody w’at done took a chance on de quilt ain’
got to be hyuh to see de thing go thoo, is dey?”

No. They didn’t have to wait any longer; Carmelite answered. She would
start things going right away. Calling to Dink, she told him to make
music on the comb so all would be lively. He began playing a merry time,
and the spirit of cheer and good fellowship went floating about the room.

Carmelite took from the table a cardboard shoe box containing the blanks
and numbered slips for the raffle, and asked Duckery if he would call
out the numbers. He put the numbered slips in his hat and the blanks in
Bennee’s hat; and after clapping his hands for attention, he said:

“If dey got innybody hyuh ain’t picked a number for dis raffle, dey
better come on now an’ choose; so we kin put ’um all in de hat together,
an’ leave Bennee commence shakin’ ’um up. ’Cause you know dis thing gotta
go thoo straight like a lotry.... Square deal to evvybody, ’dout inny
prefyun.” (Preference.)

Each member present had a number; and Carmelite had the list with their
names “marked-up on de paper.” They were all sure that the drawing would
be fair and square. Duckery would call the numbers and Bennee would
handle the blanks.

Dink’s harmonious comb was playing a pleasant obligato as the drawing
began, and all eyes were looking on with eager expectation.

“Number foteen!” Duckery called out, taking the slip from the hat with a
flourish.

“Nothin’ ain’ wrote on dis’n,” Bennee informed him, unfolding the blank
and examining it on both sides.

Duckery looked at him with an ominous scowl, exclaiming:

“Ole country nigger, ain’t you never took part in a raffle befo’?... Dat
ain’ de way you gotta call back to me w’en I calls out de number.... If
dey ain’ got nothin’ on de paper, all you gotta say to me is _Blank_....
’Till you picks out de paper got _Prize_ marked-up on it.... Now go
’head, an’ do de thing right.... An’ lissen good so you kin un’stan’ de
numbers w’en I calls ’um.”

“Da’s right, Duckery,” came Carmelite’s earnest approval. “You make dis
thing go thoo straight. ’Cause I don’ wan’ have none y’all niggers say I
had dese numbers fixed-up befo’ han’. An’ say I robbed ’um out a dime,
’cause dey ain’ had de luck to win de quilt.”

“I know you ain’ talkin’ to me,” she heard Scilla’s sharp staccato call
out. “I know I ain’ goin’ bother my good self ’bout raisin’ no trouble
over one li’l ole dry dime I done paid out on any quilt.”

“Number nine,” Duckery called in a loud voice.

“Dis’n blank, too,” Bennee answered innocently.

Duckery rolled his eyes and glared at him intently, while everybody
laughed at Bennee’s forgetfulness.

“Number fifty-two,” Duckery called, fixing his gaze sternly on Bennee.

“Blank,” Bennee answered with a pleased grin; satisfied that he was
learning the intricacies of the game.

“Number nineteen,” Duckery called gaily; seeing Mozella looking at him
with keen anticipation.

“Blank,” came Bennee’s announcement.

“Law ...d!” reverberated Mozella’s exclamation of disappointment. “I
sho thought my number nineteen was goin’ bring me good luck.... Da’s de
number o’ de day my sister baby was bawn.... An’ bawn wid one teeth in de
front ’is mouth, too.”

“O g’way from hyuh, gal,” scoffed Keziah, giving Mozella a playful push.
“Ugly an’ ill-formed as yo’ sister baby is,—’tain no wonder yo’ li’l dime
done went astray.”

Much displeased at being interrupted by the laughter that followed
Keziah’s comment, Duckery looked at the women and shouted crossly:

“Quit y’all wranglin’, for Gawd sake! An’ lemme git thoo playin’ wid dis
hat-full o’ papers.... You think I wan’ stay hyuh all night?”

The commanding tone of his voice and the spectacular batting of his
eyelids brought immediate silence. Whereupon he called out vehemently:

“Number twenny-two!”

“Twenny-two blank like de yuther one,” Bennee answered with a tone of
apparent surprise.

“You already done forgot w’at I tol’ you?” Duckery grumbled, fixing him
with a menacing stare, before taking another slip from the hat.

“Number ninety-nine,” he boomed, looking at Bennee steadily.

“Dis’n ain’ blank!” Bennee called out joyfully. “Dis’n got somh’n wrote
’cross it, diffunt from all de yuther ones.”

“Number ninety-nine de prize!” Broke forth the excited chorus of soprano
voices.... “Who number ninety-nine is, Carmelite?” they questioned.
“Ninety-nine done win de quilt.... Innybody hyuh got ninety-nine for dey
number?” They babbled. “Who ever ’tis picked ninety-nine for dey number,
sho is lucky. Ain’t dey?” The comment went on; until Carmelite brought
the list of names and looked to see whose name was written after the
winning number.

“Lawd, people!” She exclaimed with delight. “Aun’ Fisky de one done win
de quilt.... An’ I ain’ sorry, either. Bad as she needin’ cov’rins w’en
de col’ weather come up on ’uh.”

“Some people sho is lucky,” declared Lethe.

“Not me,” Frozine informed her. “I ain’ never win nothin’ in my whole
life.... An’ hyuh I comed thoo all dis mud an’ rain to witness Carmelite
fine Jacob-ladder quilt go ’way from hyuh to lay ’cross somebody else
bed.... Umph!”

“Who?” commented Pinkey, sympathetically. “You ain’ need to grumble....
De onles’ thing I ever win, was a li’l can o’ cundense milk one time....
Sho’ ’nough. No playin’,” she went on, trying to convince them in spite
of their laughter “’Twus to a singin’ cawntes’ at de Red Bean Row, yonder
in Freetown.... An’ w’en I got home an’ went to open de cundense milk; de
thing had done turn so sour, I was compel to th’ow it away.”

Becoming impatient over the long delay and the amusing gossip of the
women, Duckery asked them:

“Y’all goin’ stay hyuh an’ talk all night ’bout bad luck; an’ tell
each-another ’bout all de things you done los’?... If evvything done
finish, I’m goin’ th’ow dese papers out my hat an’ go ’way from hyuh.”

Carmelite took his hat and told him to wait. She had a little surprise
for everybody. She had a nice cake she made for the occasion, and she
wanted each one to have a piece of cake and some coffee “to console dey
feelin’s for not winnin’ de quilt.” Then afterwards, they could all go to
the wake together.

The announcement brought a smile to every face. Dink began playing on the
comb with renewed animation; and the room buzzed with merry laughter and
friendly chatter as Carmelite went back to get the refreshments.

Going into the kitchen in a happy frame of mind, she called to Gussie
cheerfully:

“Who you reckon had de lucky number to win de quilt, Gussie?”

There was no response to her question. Gussie was sound asleep in his
chair beside the stove. She decided that it was best not to wake him
until after the refreshments were served. Then when everybody was ready
to leave, she would call him and give him the quilt to take home to Aunt
Fisky.

Carmelite took a knife from the safe drawer and tiptoed over to the table
to cut the cake. The plate was empty. Nothing on it but a few scattered
crumbs to tell that just a short while before it held a splendid duck-egg
cake.

Could she believe her eyes? There was only one person to suspect, she
told herself. And that person was Gussie. Nobody else had been in the
kitchen since the cake was put on the table to cool.... To think he would
do a mean, deceitful trick like that, after she was kind enough to let
him come in out of the rain and sit by her stove to get dry.... And not
a single piece left to offer her friends, after she just got through
telling them about her good, rich duck-egg cake!... What would they think
of her?

With a sudden resolve, she hurried over to Gussie and grabbed him by the
shoulders with both hands.

“Wake up hyuh! You nasty, low-down rogue.... Befo’ I pound you ’bout de
head wid a billet o’ wood!” She muttered with restrained passion, shaking
him roughly. “W’at you mean, prowlin’ ’round my kitchen an’ puttin’ yo’
filt’y han’s on things w’at ain’ b’lonks to you?... Wake up an’ git out
o’ hyuh, I tell you!”

Gussie opened his eyes and looked at her half dazed; wondering who she
was, and what the rough treatment meant. His mind was not clear and he
seemed uncertain of his whereabouts.

“Don’t you hyeah w’at I say?” Carmelite shouted, trying to pull him off
the chair.

“Don’ play so rough,” Gussie pleaded, struggling to free himself. “I ain’
goin’ bother nobody, settin’ hyuh by de stove till I git dry.”

“You mus’ be a drunken fool!” Carmelite answered hotly. “After you
done et up all my good cake,—thinkin’ I’m goin’ leave you stay hyuh
comfatubble; an’ I gotta go younder befo’ all dem people in de room, wid
a empty plate?... No’n deed, Lawd!” She vociferated, hearing the sound of
footsteps approaching. “So you better come on an’ git off dis chair befo’
I make dem mens drag yo’ nasty body thoo dis house an’ th’ow you in de
street unmerciful!... You hyeah?”

Soongy and Pinkey stood in the door looking on in blank amazement,
wondering what the difficulty was, and asking how Gussie happened to come
in without anybody seeing him.

Carmelite gave a dramatic recital of Gussie’s early arrival, his wretched
condition, and her willingness to give him shelter on account of her pity
for Aunt Fisky. She told how he promised to stay out of the room until
after the raffle was over; how she came out to tell him that his number
had won the quilt; how she went to cut the cake and made the startling
discovery that Gussie had eaten all of it, leaving her nothing to offer
her friends except “a pot full o’ black coffee an’ plain cistun water to
drink widout nothin’ to eat.”

There was only one thing to do, Soongy declared emphatically. Carmelite
was too foolish, wasting time multiplying words over ole no-count
Gussie.... Nobody could do her a dirty trick like that and sit to his
ease in front of her stove.... Who?... Talkin’ about it wouldn’t do no
good.... “_Hands_ was de inst’uments to start things movin’.” ... If one
woman’s pair of hands couldn’t manage ole drunken Gussie, she bet three
“wimmin’s six black hands wouldn’ miss takin’ charge of him to land him
out-doors in de high road whah he could scuffle wid his cawnshunce aft’
he done come thoo.”

Gussie looked from one to the other, uneasily; as though he were trying
to assure himself what the commotion was about.

“Ain’t no need to look so pityful, an’ try an’ say you ain’ did nothin,”
Pinkey told him, going over to his chair and seeming to adjust herself
for the coming exertion. “Yo’ time done come to vacate dis kitchen,” she
went on with assumed authority. “An’ Pinkey Clay right hyuh to tussle
wid you.... Come on, Soongy,” she commanded. “You grab hold ’is laigs
to keep ’im from kickin’.... An’ you git to de middle, Carm’lite, to
keep ’im from bendin’-in.... An’ I know w’en Pinkey Clay two han’s git
fasten ’round ’is th’oat, he sho goin’ keep still.... An’ I _dare_ ’im to
w’imper!... Come on, ole slow niggers,—git yo position!” She called with
impatience, determined to carry out her strategy without further delay.

After a few seconds of strenuous tugging and lifting, the unresisting,
half-bewildered Gussie was being hurried towards the front door in
haughty triumph. As they passed through the front room, the surprised
members, thinking the unique spectacle was a feature of amusement
provided for their entertainment, greeted the procession with peals of
laughter and great excitement.

Who could it be?... The thing looked too heavy to be a stuffed man,
because all the women were bending.... Maybe it was a robber, Carmelite
found in her house.... What made them want to carry the man out-doors?...
Suppose somebody dropped dead in Carmelite’s kitchen?...

So the riot of question and comment continued until the three women came
back, after having abruptly deposited their obnoxious burden on the muddy
road, a short distance from the house, “to go hunt sattafaction whah-ever
he wan’ look for it.”

“W’at you goin’ do if Gussie come back?” Bennee inquired, when Carmelite
had finished giving a graphic account of the mysterious proceeding; every
minor detail stressed with elocutionary fervor for their sympathetic
understanding.

Gussie knew better than to come back, she informed them. ’Specially after
the way all their three pair of hands had worked on him.... Gussie wasn’t
goin’ consider comin’ back, now that the rain done stopped, and he was
out-doors where he could realize that he wasn’t cripple complete, to
hinder him from keepin’ on goin’.

“But leave ole Gussie in Gawd han’s,” Carmelite concluded with willing
resignation. “An’ all y’all members come wid me to de kitchen an’ drink
some coffee; so we kin hurry ’way from hyuh an’ go yonder to Tempe wake.”

Eager to dispense with any mention of Gussie for the time being, and
wanting her friends to enjoy what remained of the hospitality planned for
them, Carmelite hurried them to the kitchen and began serving coffee;
laughing good-naturedly as she made amusing apologies for the “skimpy
li’l refreshnin’ foods;” thanking them for “helpin’ her out so nice”; and
drinking with everyone to the “big success” of the raffle.




When Gussie recovered from his dull bewilderment and found himself out on
the street, alone in the mud and darkness; he tried to collect his wits
and see if he could explain what everything was about. He remembered his
long walk in the storm down to the old man Hooblitz’s place at the edge
of the woods; recalling more vividly than anything else, the unfriendly
greeting of the old man, his cross ugly humor, and the mean way that old
Hooblitz hurried him out into the driving rain.

He also had a faint remembrance of a welcome drink with Chicken-Volsin,
somewhere along the road. But it was somewhat hazy. Not near as clear as
the recollection of himself hurrying on through the rain to see about
winning the quilt at Carmelite’s raffle, so he could take it home to Aunt
Fisky and make the old lady feel pleased.

Then he remembered Carmelite’s kitchen, and the nice warm fire in the
stove; and how good he felt when his clothes began to get dry; and the
good cup of hot coffee Carmelite gave him just before he fell asleep. But
after that, he could recall nothing more until the time he woke up and
found Carmelite shaking him and calling him names, and talking so loud
that Pinkey and Soongy came out and pitched into him, before he could get
his right presence of mind and keep them from over-coming him, the same
as if he was chillun.

Why they carried him out-doors and dumped him in the street, he couldn’t
understand to save his soul. Carmelite must have some grudge against
him, and was mad because he came to the raffle. She didn’t want him to
win the quilt; and that’s the way she fixed it up to git rid of him. But
didn’t he have as much right to be there as anybody else? Wasn’t his dime
just as good as anybody else’s money?... But maybe it was a good thing.
He had no business going. It served him right,—running with niggers all
the time and expecting them to treat him like their own kind.... But old
man Hooblitz was _white_. Look how _he_ treated him?... What difference
did it make after all? White or colored,—nobody gave a damn for him.
All Gritny knew who Gussie Fisky was; but that didn’t make them act no
kinder, and try to show him how to better his poor condition....

Suddenly realizing that his troubled meditation was growing into a
feeling of stupid self-pity and morbid resentment, he looked up nervously
at the few faint glimmering stars in the murky sky, wondering where
he would go to rid himself of his unhappy mood and forget his utter
loneliness.

Remembering Tempe’s wake, he started off down the quiet street to the
New Hope church. He went stumbling along aimlessly over the muddy
street-crossings and puddles of water on the low uneven banquettes, not
caring whether the road was wet or dry, or how splashed and bedraggled
his clothes became.

When he reached the church corner he was greeted by the blinking lights
from the church windows and the wistful singing of the members inside;
and the thought of human contact, however casual or momentary it might
be, caused him to smile and hurry on; knowing how glad he would be to
hear the sound of some friendly voice and feel the warm touch of a
sympathetic hand.

As he started up the rickety steps of the church, he stopped half way
to listen to the wave of melancholy song that came flowing out into the
darkness. It made him shiver with a strange feeling of sadness as he
caught a few words of the mournful wail and thought of their portentous
meaning....

“Death’s goin’-a lay his cold, icy han’ on me....”

He heard their full rich voices repeat the somber message over and over.
The slow, majestic movement of the chant rising and surging over them
like a flood of melody, lifting their emotional souls to heights of
poignant ecstasy.

But what made them keep on telling Tempe about what Death was going to
do? Gussie asked himself; deliberating whether he would go in or wait
until the song was finished.

Tempe didn’t need to know anything more about Death.... Tempe was sitting
up in the house of death now. And she could tell a heap more about what
was going on yonder than anybody sitting up in the church, singing about
it.... But maybe they were trying to tell their own self something about
Death.... The way Death was going to come up on them when their time came
for crossing over....

“Hell! I don’ feel like goin’ up in yonder an’ lissen at dat kind o’
thing,” he suddenly concluded. “I’m goin’ set hyuh on de step till dey
raise some yuther ballet mo’ sattafyin’ to de feelin’s,” he went on,
looking about for a dry spot to sit down. “Dey oughta try an’ sing somh’n
mo’ pleasin’ over Tempe. ’Stead o’ keep tellin’ ’uh w’at Death goin’ do;
after Gawd done seen fit to snatch ’uh away from hyuh so haphazzud.”

After a while the melodious flowing wave began to recede; growing fainter
and fainter, until the subdued lament faded away into a low murmuring
hum. It was soothing and pleasant, Gussie thought; and he sat listening
indolently.

Very soon he heard the velvety sound of a woman’s vibrant contralto voice
intone a line of another ballet. One by one the members took up the
somber burden, proclaiming the simple words with full-voiced exultation.

Getting up to go in, Gussie stopped suddenly, as the last lines came to
him....

    “Sinner, don’t let this harves’ pass,
    An’ die an’ go to Hell at las’....”

The singing irritated him. It made him uncomfortable to think of the
unwelcome message. Why did it disturb him, he asked himself. Was it the
slow, sad minor tune? Or the cold, direct words of the song?

“Great Gawd A’mighty!” He said to himself, starting to go down the steps.
“If da’s de onles’ kind o’ singin’ dey goin’ do hyuh tonight; ’tain no
pleasure for me to linger hyuh.... Shucks! I’m goin’ yonder ’cross de
Green an’ lay down an’ sleep.”

Trying to forget his disappointment, he began to whistle a cheerful tune
and started down the street in the direction of the East Green. The rain
was over, but the air was damp and chilly; and long fringes of clouds
were passing across the moon in slow-moving rifts. The houses along the
road were all closed, and everything was dark and still.

What would he tell Aunt Fisky about the quilt, he asked himself. Poor old
soul;—he sho counted on bringing it home to her for a nice surprise....
Look like out of five chances, one number sho oughta made him win the
thing.... Maybe Carmelite didn’t pick him five numbers for the four-bits
he gave her.... And Aunt Fisky needed a good warm quilt, too.... And
needed it more than anybody they had sittin’ up in Carmelite’s house....

His thoughts were suddenly interrupted by the sound of a bell floating
across the Green, not very far away. Looking up, he saw the reflection of
a head-light on the switch engine coming towards him.

“Mus’ be close on to twelve o’clock,” he remarked casually. “Da’s ’bout
de time dat switchin’ engine come up hyuh evvy night to pull freight off
Morgan W’arf.... Lemme hurry up; an’ I kin see my way thoo de mud, clean
home, w’ile dat light shinin’ ’cross de Green. ’Cause dat ole crawfish
pon’ sho is a nasty place for mud an’ slush, aft’ a hard rain like we bin
had tonight.... Ole switch engine, you sho struck it right for Gussie dis
time....” He went on talking aloud; quickening his pace in order to get
over the track before the engine reached him.

Hurrying on, he looked again to see how far away the engine was.... He
could make it across the track easy enough.... The engine wasn’t moving
very fast.... A few steps more, and he would be over the switch before
the engine reached the corner.

The reflection from the head-light showed nearly half-way across the
Green. He could see the water from the duck pond all over the road, clean
up to the front gate of his house. He recognized the old house by the
thin little piece of light he saw blinking through the leaves of the
castor oil bushes growing by the window.... Aunt Fisky must be up yet....
She didn’t leave no candle burning when she went to bed.... She couldn’t
be sick?... Maybe she was waiting to see if he had the quilt.... Poor ole
soul,—she sho would be sorry to know he didn’t win the thing....

Seeing the engine still a few feet away, he started to run; impatient to
get over the track before the long line of box cars blocked the way and
kept him waiting in the mud and dark. He felt confident that he would be
able to clear the track with perfect safety, just as he had done it many
a night.

But a sinister, opposing fate decreed that Gussie’s final hour had come.
A secret snare lay in his path, half-buried in the hard, unyielding mud.

There it lay hidden in the dark, sticking up like a waiting noose to
catch his hurrying foot: a treacherous loop of rusty wire discarded from
a bale of hay, dropped on the road by a passing wagon; or thrown there by
some careless hand,—how long ago, no one could tell.

A running jump, and he’d clear the track!... But tripping on the wire,
he was thrown headlong across the rail; his unloved, unregarded body
falling an instant victim to the murderous wheels of the heedless engine.




The morning after the raffle at Carmelite’s house, the East Green was in
a veritable fever of excitement. Such a number of things had happened, it
seemed that all the neighbors of the Green were out-of-doors discussing
the strange events. Some amused, others genuinely distressed; all amazed
and amazingly voluble.

Nobody appeared to be concerned about work. Women on their way to market
stopped at front gates to laugh about the “upsetment” Gussie caused
at the raffle. Some stood on street corners rehearsing the account of
Tempe’s mysterious drowning in the well, and the new pleasure that
awaited them at her approaching funeral. While others spoke in awed
tones of the disorderly conduct of Gussie at Carmelite’s house, and the
disastrous fate that followed him on his way home.

Where did he go after the women carried him out of Carmelite’s kitchen
and left him on the street? They asked one another. Nobody remembered
seeing him at Tempe’s wake.... Maybe Gussie was drunk when the engine
knocked him down?...

And what made them leave him out there on the track alone? Didn’t nobody
on the engine know they had runned over a man?... Who found the body
first, and went and carried Aunt Fisky the bad news?

So the comment and questioning continued. But no one seemed to have any
definite knowledge of the sad tragedy. All Carmelite knew was what Aunt
Fisky had told her when she went to bring her the quilt, early that
morning. The old woman said she got up about six o’clock; and when she
opened the gate to let the ducks out to the crawfish pond, she saw a
crowd of people standing by the switch, across the Green. She went over
to see what had happened, and they told her that Gussie had been run over
by the switch engine sometime during the night. That just a short while
before, the man in charge of the switch lights found the body when he was
going his rounds; and they were waiting for the coroner to come before
the body could be moved.

Carmelite told how she remained with Aunt Fisky, helping her to get the
house in readiness, “makin’ evvything look nice for Gussie w’en dey
fetched de body home.”

“Po’ ole soul, she mus’ bin bowed down heavy!” Mozella commented
feelingly.

“No she ain’t,” Carmelite answered. “Aun’ Fisky sho is got de right
un’stannin’ ’bout de way Gussie runned up on Death, an’ went ’way from
hyuh wid nobody ’round ’im.... She say Gawd was jus’ natchally watchin’
ove’ ’im careful. Right hyuh in dis Green.... An’ knowed all ’bout de
danger comin’ up on Gussie in de darkness.... Knowed it good.... ’Cause
Gawd bin watchin’ Gussie for a long time. An’ tol’ ’uh He was hol’in
Gussie right in ’Is han’s.... Waitin’ till de sperret command ’Im to cut
Gussie down....”

“Dey ain’ goin’ hol’ de wake in de church, is dey?” one of the women
asked, incredulously.

“W’at business dey got bringin’ Gussie up in inny church?” Carmelite
asked abruptly; surprised at her friend’s display of ignorance. “Evvybody
know old sinful Gussie ain’ never bin no Chrishtun.... Preachin’ ove’ ’im
now ain’ goin’ do no good; yonder whah he walkin’ munks all dem heavy
swingein’ flames, tawmentin’ his po’ soul an’ body.”

“An’ I bet ole no-count Gussie ain’ left a dry nickel to pay de un’taker
for ridin’ ’im down to de graveyard, either,” commented Soongy, shaking
her head reflectively.

Yes he did. Carmelite assured her. The secret society was going to
take charge of the funeral. Gussie belonged to the “Nights o’ Peefus.”
And word had been sent to all the members to come to the wake at Aunt
Fisky’s house that night. Gussie would be sure to have a fine funeral;
she declared with authority. Because the Peefus Lodge always had a fine
band of music. “An’ de secaterry already done give out de news dat Gussie
died finanshul.”

Feeling satisfied with having acquainted her friends with all these
important details, Carmelite left them; saying that she was going to
Lethe’s house to deliver a message from Aunt Fisky.

Eager to bestow upon Gussie any small honor that would lend added dignity
to the farewell ceremony, the old woman asked Carmelite to go and see
some of the friends who had played with Gussie in early childhood,
and ask them to come and serve as pall-bearers at the funeral. Having
notified all but one, Carmelite asked Lethe to send word to Felo and get
his promise to be present the next day. This duty accomplished, she told
Lethe that she was going home “to git down on her knees an’ wipe up all
dem mud tracks on her flo’. An’ try an’ chastise her cawnshunce for de
mean way she set to po’ Gussie. Not knowin’ de po’ soul was jus’ ’bout
ready to stumble into Hell-fire.”

“Ain’ it true?” Lethe corroborated with thorough understanding. “Dis
whole life ain’ resemble nothin’ mo’n a fatal mat’en-nee.” (Matinee.)




Flattered with having the honor of being the first one to acquaint
Felo with the startling account of Gussie’s death, Lethe lost no time
in hurrying to Miss Barbara’s grocery store to communicate with him
by telephone. She knew that Felo would just be giving Mr. Amos his
breakfast; that it would be the best time to catch him at home, before
he went out to market. She was sure that he had not heard from anyone
about Tempe’s drowning; so she would tell him all the particulars, and
all about the funeral which was to take place that day; and maybe Felo
would come over to Gretna early, and they would have a little visit at
her house before they went to the graveyard.

Such astounding news from home so early in the morning, served to arouse
Felo’s excitable temperament to unrestrained emotional flights. Mr. Amos
sat drinking his coffee, listening to Felo’s exclamations of surprise,
waiting patiently for the conversation to end.

When Lethe finished her long harangue, Felo hung up the receiver
nervously and came into the dining-room, his eyes staring with a startled
expression.

“Dah bless Gawd!” he exclaimed; taking a seat across the room, near the
kitchen door. “I ain’ _never_ knowed it to fail; long as I kin remember,”
he went on, with a sweeping gesture of the right arm. “Evvy time you
see me dream ’bout fresh meat, you sho find out it ain’ goin’ be mo’n a
day pass by, befo’ I hyeah tell ’bout somebody done died.... An’ now I
bin had a dream ’bout fresh meat, dis make _three_ nights successful,
han’-runnin’.... An’ hyuh come de news from Lethe dis mawnin’, ’bout two
mo’ people done passed out, yonder in Gritny....”

“Never mind your dreams,” Mr. Amos interrupted with an amused smile.
“Tell me who’s dead. And you can think about your fresh meat afterwards.”

“Go ’head, an’ laugh much as you please,” Felo answered, a trifle
provoked. “Y’all w’ite folks jus’ alike.... All time ready to laugh at
somh’n you don’ un’stan....”

“Well, let us hear what Lethe had to say, and maybe I will be better able
to interpret your dream,” Mr. Amos encouraged him.

“Da’s de very thing I wan’t tell you. If you only keep still, an’ stop
ty’in’ up my pro-gress wid so many on-nec’sary queshtun,” he remonstrated
playfully; eager to recount Lethe’s sensational chronicle of disaster.

Three deaths in less than a week’s time! He began solemnly.... Ole
Aunt Milly from down the bayou.... Pulled up in a skiff, all the way
from Peach Orchard.... Comin’ all that long distance, rolled up in a
blanket.... And buried in a grave half-full of rain water! He went on
enumerating the lugubrious incidents; falling into a sort of chant,
wavering between two monotonous tones.

Then Tempe, fallin’ in a well and gettin’ drownded so curuss.... And
nobody able to get the straight understandin’ about it.... And smack
on top of dat: Gussie Fisky, cut down by a switch engine haphazzud....
Right in front of his own house, in the black night.... And nobody
close by to carry the news.... Umph-umph! Went the vigorous grunt of
contemplation.... What was the world comin’ to?... These Gritny people
better make haste and pray. Before Gawd reached down and snatched at ’um;
and they come to open their eyes in Tawment.... Beggin’ for mercy when it
wasn’t no use.... “Yas Lawd!” he concluded with a deep sigh. “It sho look
like sudden deaths is gittin’ pop’lar.”

Knowing Felo’s eager readiness to have a part in every “popular”
demonstration of this kind; Mr. Amos asked him how he was going to manage
to be present at all the ceremonies.

No. He wasn’t going to take part in Tempe’s burying, Felo explained.
They didn’t need him to speed Tempe over.... Tempe was a Chrishtun;
and they would have a whole multitude of wimmins there to raise big
excitement over her.... He was going to stay home and try to “sun the
house,” and wipe up the floors.... Try and see if he couldn’t kill that
strong miljew scent Mr. Amos said he found about the house the last
couple of days.... Complainin’ and worryin’ about the dinin’room smellin’
mouldy.... And the rain bin fallin’ so steady lately; nobody ain’ goin’
study ’bout openin’ any window to leave in fresh air, damp as ever’thing
is out-doors.... Anybody ought to know how that ole grass rug on the
floor holds the miljew when the weather be’s rainy.... He was going to
stay home and give all his ’tenshun to the house.... If the sun just
comed out strong and ’lowed him a chance to work good all day....

But his mind told him that he had to go see Gussie that night.... Gussie
was a brother-member of his Lodge. And it was compulsionary for him to
be at the wake and go to the funeral.... Aunt Fisky sont him word that
she wanted all Gussie’s ole-time playmates to walk ’long-side him for
pall-bearers.... So after he got through fixin’ supper, he was goin’
to Gritny, and stay all night; and come back in the evenin’ after the
funeral was over.

Fully conscious of the deep importance with which Felo considered his
sentimental expedition, and agreeable to leaving him to the enjoyment of
his own devices; Mr. Amos told him to take the whole day, and to let the
house-cleaning go for another time.

No. He insisted on following his own mind, and getting through with what
he had to do, so he would hear no more talk about that play-gone miljew
scent in the house; when he got back from Gritny, and wanted to tell
about what took place when they put Gussie away.... He couldn’t talk
sociable when people kept on makin’ a whole lot of complainin’.... “An’
innyway,—de sun done comed out dis mawnin’, an’ I ain’ goin’ risk puttin’
de thing off no longer.... So gimme some change to go to market an’ buy
yo’ li’l foods for dis evenin’.... An’ go ’head to yo’ office, an’ lemme
git to my business.”

Mr. Amos gave him the money for the purchases, and was about to leave,
when Felo followed him to the door and asked:

“You want some yam sweet potato dis evenin’? Fixed in de oven wid butter
an’ milk an’ vunilla essen’, an’ some dem w’ite-o’-aig things you call
mush-mallow?”

Mr. Amos gave a smile of assent, remembering this was one of Felo’s
boasted specialties, and that it was intended as a delicate compliment.

“An’ you want some smothered poke-chops, an’ stuffed aigplant wid swimps
in ’um?” Felo suggested.

“Why do you want to make such a feast?” Mr. Amos asked in surprise.
“After you finish all the house-cleaning you say you mean to do, you
better rest yourself; if you hope to do any singing at a wake tonight....
Fix the yams, if you care to. But get something else easy to cook.”

“Man, go ’head to yo’ office, for Gawd sake,” Felo told him; provoked at
having his show of hospitality received with such marked indifference.
“’Tain no use try’n to sattafy some people, w’en dey ain’ never learnt
how to ’preshate li’l favors did for ’um wid a free heart.... Go ’head
to yo’ office.... An’ you better be glad if you come back hyuh an’ fin’
coffee an’ bread to eat, w’en you git home dis evenin’.”




Left to himself, after he had done his marketing in the neighborhood,
it was not long until Felo’s domestic maneuvering was in full swing.
Any casual passer-by would have supposed the house was in process of
evacuation. Festoons of bed-clothes and barricades of pillows protruded
negligently from upstairs windows; scarves and cushions and draperies
of many colors flaunted in reckless abandon from down-stairs windows;
rugs hung over the side fence, and blankets flapped on the back-yard
clothes-line. Everything was brought out to bask in the welcome sunshine
and to gather freshness from the pleasant flowing breeze. Filled with
abundant energy and the unflagging desire to please, Felo was determined
to overlook no single detail about the house. Work don’t never hurt
nobody if they goes at it with the right sperret, he told himself....
He sho was goin’ to try his best to keep people from thinkin’ his boss
was runnin’ a li’l ole picayune boa’din’-house.... This house was a
rezzident; and he sho was goin’ keep it lookin’ so.... And Mr. Amos never
need feel ’shamed to have any comp’ny try to ’zamine his toys and things,
and all them “heavy-heavy-hangs-ove’-yo’-head” he had on the wall; after
Felo got done playin’ with ’um....

When he came home in the evening, Mr. Amos was struck by the orderly
appearance of everything. The rugs were fresh-looking and arranged with
care; the floors and the furniture were rubbed and polished; bright
flowers were on the piano and tables; and the whole house looked
cheerful and inviting.

As he walked back to the diningroom he heard the pleasant sound of Felo’s
voice, singing at his work in the kitchen.

    “Death he is a cruel monster in dis lan’;
    You kin call but he won’t answer, ain’t it gran’?”

The words didn’t carry a very cheerful greeting; but the melody was a
lovely one; thought Mr. Amos, as he stood listening, waiting until Felo
would finish the verse.

    “I kin leave at break of day,
    You will find but empty clay,—
    Lawd, I wonder w’at they’ll say
            W’en I’m gone...?”

“What a strange allurement death and wakes and funerals seem to hold out
to him; when at heart he is really of a happy disposition,” Mr. Amos
commented, as Felo ended his song and changed to a soft murmuring hum.

Mr. Amos stood looking about the room, waiting for Felo to sing again.
Suddenly he became conscious of the odor of pineapple. Wondering where
it came from, he soon discovered a large pineapple towering out of the
punch bowl on the corner cupboard, and another one standing on a tray on
the side table.

“Well, what do you call this?” He asked Felo, not knowing how to regard
the unusual decoration.

Felo came in from the kitchen, smiling, wanting to know if everything
wasn’t “sattafactual.”

Everything was fine. He was thoroughly pleased; Mr. Amos told him. “But
will you kindly tell me why you bought these pineapples and put them in
here after this fashion?”

Felo looked at the pineapples thoughtfully, his face assuming a puzzled
expression. What was the matter with them? They were nice and fresh....
He never let nobody sell him no cheap rotten fruits.... These pineapples
were fine ripe pineapples.... And nobody couldn’t buy no better
pineapples for two-bits a piece....

“But you know I never eat pineapples,” Mr. Amos informed him placidly.

“Dah bless Gawd!” Felo exclaimed, abashed; rolling his eyes impressively
from one pineapple to the other. “You know, I clean forgot you ain’ never
eat pineapple,” he tried to explain. “Gawd knows.” He apologized with
deep feeling. “De thing sho did slip my membunce, jus’ like I tell you.”

“And that’s the reason why you bought two pineapples instead of one?”
Mr. Amos asked, teasingly.

“You ain’ try’n to raise no complaint ’bout fo’-bits, is you?” Felo went
on. “But you know, de things look so nice an’ temptin’ w’en I seen ’um on
de Dago stan’ dis mawnin’; I thought on w’at I hyeah’d you say,—how dis
place smell so mouldy.... So I say: I’m goin’ buy dese pair o’ pineapples
an’ put ’um in de room hyuh; an’ I know dey goin’ sho out-stink a
billy-goat.... An’ I bet you ain’ smell no miljew scent up in hyuh now.
Is you?”

Mr. Amos complimented him on his novel method of disinfecting, but said
he preferred to smell the tempting scent that came floating in from the
pots.

Felo rolled his eyes appreciatively, saying:

“Well, hurry up an’ set to de table, an’ lemme bring you yo’ li’l foods
befo’ yo’ appatite fo’sake you. Evvything ready. So come on an’ eat. An’
maybe I kin go ’way from hyuh soon, w’en I git thoo waitin’ on you.”

Further urging was unnecessary. Mr. Amos knew by the regaling odors
coming from the kitchen, that the evening meal would consist of much more
than the meager “coffee and bread” which Felo promised in the morning.
Having revoked his threat, in spite of the many duties accomplished that
day, Felo had exerted himself in preparing a truly noble dinner.

Not satisfied with the simple luxury of eggplant stuffed with shrimp and
tomato, seasoned with onion, thyme, parsley and red pepper, macerated
with milk and butter, Felo had added the epicurean garnish of rolled
toast and grated sapsago cheese. The yam potatoes, crowned with an
aureole of golden-brown marshmallows, looked like an arrangement
of autumn leaves mottled with sunshine; and Mr. Amos found himself
wondering if it were not a bowl of delectable vegetables masquerading
as a delicious dessert. The pork chops were smothered in a rich tomato
gravy flavored with cloves and lemon peel; a tempting ragout, which Felo
assured Mr. Amos, as he placed before him a plate of hot biscuits just
out of the oven, “sho will make you rear back an’ smack yo’ lips manful,
after you done sopped some o’ dese light biscuits in dis good ole-time
Creyall gravy.”

Knowing that Felo at all times looked for more active proof than simple
words of praise in appreciation of his culinary efforts, Mr. Amos
endeavored to “perish” and “destroy” as much as was humanly possible.
Because Felo was most pleased when he saw people “eat good”; and “et like
dey bin use to good eatin’.” Feeling that “a dinner table full o’ empty
plates an’ dishes was cert’ny mo’ convincin’ den a whole lot o’ col’
overs settin’ up in de ’frigerator.”

When Mr. Amos finished his coffee, he went upstairs to lie down, leaving
Felo to “scuffle wid his pots an’ make quick tracks for Gritny.” It was
not long before the kitchen boomed with the happy chorus of “De ole sheep
done knowed de road”; every now and then a broken cadence floating off
through the house like the sound of jubilation:

    “My brother, ain’t you got yo’ counts all sealed?
      De young lambs mus’ find de way.
    You better git ’um ready ’fore you leave dis field;
      De young lambs mus’ find de way.”

It was a pleasant sound, and Mr. Amos delayed reading his book as long as
the singing continued. As soon as there was silence in the kitchen, he
knew that Felo was dressing, and that it would not be long until he was
on his way across the river to Gussie’s wake.




If there were two particular forms of divertissement equally cherished
by every dweller of the East Green and thereabouts, perhaps the one
holding second place would be the fine funeral following a nice wake.
Granting this, it was easy to understand why Gussie’s obsequies seemed
to offer something of more than ordinary importance. Being a white man,
and an outcast among his own color; and a man without religion, and
therefore counted a lost soul among his church-going colored companions;
they were deeply concerned about how he would be “put away with any right
kind of form and fashion.” ... Who could they get to preach his funeral
if the colored elder didn’t want to come?... Maybe Aunt Fisky would get
the white folks to bring the priest to say prayers and swing smoke over
Gussie and sprinkle him with holy water?...

Conjectural comment was at its height when Felo arrived. And curious to
know the full particulars, like all the other members present, he asked
Aunt Fisky if she had done anything regarding the funeral ceremonies. She
told him quietly that she didn’t want any priest or revyun of any kind to
come up in her house.... She wasn’t no hypocrite.... Everybody in Gritny
knew that Gussie never was no church member.... And now that Gussie was
’ceased, there wasn’t no use for any elder to stand up and preach about
his sinful ways.... It couldn’t help Gussie none. And what good would
it do anybody else?... They ain’t got to tell Gawd about it; ’cause Gawd
already knowed what Gussie was. So He didn’t have to listen to a whole
lot o’ random.... And besides, she didn’t believe in rakin’-up people’s
wrong-doin’ after they gone. The members could sing over Gussie much as
they pleased. And the man from the Peefus Lodge could say the Ow Father
and read something out his book. And that’s all she cared about.... And
she was goin’ to see that they did it, too.... Gussie had dragged on
long enough with a whole lot o’ racket and confusion. So she made up her
mind that she was goin’ to see him go ’way from this earth quiet and
respectable.... She wasn’t goin’ to find no fault ’bout havin’ a brass
band; ’cause she knowed Gussie always liked music and was _too_ proud to
walk behind a purrade. So, if people cared anything at all about her and
Gussie feelin’s, she cert’ny would look to see them respect her wishes in
this lonesome interprise....

Felo said he would tell everyone present, and promised to see that her
wishes would be obeyed. He went over to talk to Carmelite, where she was
sitting in a corner, looking very dejected. She shook hands with him and
listened silently as he repeated what Aunt Fisky had told him.

“An’ you sho kin count on me, Mr. Felo, to help you make dese niggers do
de right thing,” Carmelite assured him feelingly.

“You goin’ set up all night?” Felo asked her.

“Sho Gawd is,” she declared with fervor. “Bad as I feel; I’m goin’ stay
right hyuh, an’ fix de coffee an’ do all I kin, befo’ I go home to my
house.”

“W’a’s de matter?” Felo asked wonderingly. “You ain’ sick, is you?”

No; she wasn’t ’zacly sick; Carmelite told him. She was jus’ feelin’
down-casted.... Sittin’ there an’ lookin’ at Gussie, an’ callin’ back to
her mind what took place to her house last night.... Gussie eatin’ up all
her duck-egg cake with nobody but himself, yonder in her kitchen.... And
hyuh a whole crowd o’ people come to eat crackers and coffee over Gussie;
and he layin there on the table and ain’t knowin’ a thing ’bout what was
goin’ on....

“An’ lookin’ so natchal, too. Widout any puttin’-on a-tall,” came
Frozine’s sympathetic comment.

“Ain’t it true,” agreed Mozella. “For a man bin cut half-in-two like he
is, Gussie sho do look natchal.”

“An’ ain’ he got a nice pale color?” remarked Soongy.

“Sho is,” declared Nookie. “I ain’ never took notice till now, how pale
Gussie complexion.”

“Look like Death done bleached his skin mo’ lighter,” Carmelite reflected
pensively.

“An’ Gussie sho look like somebody diffunt, layin’ up there strouded in
dem purrade clo’se he got on,” said Pinkey, taking a seat along-side of
Carmelite.

At sight of Aunt Fisky coming in from the back room, all comment ceased
for a while. She came over where the women were sitting, and gave
Carmelite a pan full of orange leaves, asking her to pin them on the
sheet “droped” over the table where Gussie was lying. Carmelite and
several of the women got down on their knees and began pinning the orange
leaves on the sheet, making a border in the form of a cross all around
the bier.

At length, a low mournful humming began to tremble in the room as the
women went on with their work in the dim weird light from the flickering
candles, standing in bottles on the mantelpiece and on the table at
Gussie’s head and feet.

Before long the old house was vibrating to the rolling sound of

    “Didn’t my Lawd deliver Daniel,
      And why not every man...?”

Their voices pulsating with unusual fervor and their minds thrilled with
the import of the words:

    “O de wind blows east, an’ de wind blows west;
      It blows like a Judgment Day;
    An’ ev’ry poor soul that never did pray
      ’ll be glad to pray dat day.”

One by one the neighbors continued to come in, each one bringing along
from home a chair to sit on; knowing that Aunt Fisky would not be able to
accommodate them, and that the crowd would increase as the night went on.

Felo began looking about eagerly to see if Lethe had come. What kept
her so late? He asked himself.... He would run around to her house to
see what was the matter.... Now was a good time. The singing was at its
height.... Nobody would miss him....




Felo lost no time, but hurried on across the Green and down the street
to Lethe’s house. As he opened the gate, he was surprised to find her
sitting on the gallery steps, leaning against the post in the darkness.

“W’at you doin’, settin’ out hyuh in de jew all alone?” He asked
abruptly. “Who you waitin’ for? Settin’ out hyuh in de dark, wid dis
chill air blowin’ ’cross yo’ shoulders, an’ nothin’ on to puhteck you
from de night dampness?”

“I’m waitin’ hyuh for Lizzie Cole to come,” Lethe answered, quietly.

“Settin’ out hyuh on-cuncerned, waitin’ for ole loud-mouth Lizzie;
an’ Aun’ Fisky an’ evvybody waitin’ yonder for you to come to Gussie
wake; an’ had to git me to come see w’at keepin’ you?” He complained.
“W’at kind o’ game dis is you play’n, inny-way?” He demanded with mock
seriousness. “You ain’ inten’ to go to de wake tonight?”

“I gotta wait hyuh till Lizzie come wid dem chickens, befo’ I kin go,”
Lethe answered calmly.

“W’at chickens you talkin’ ’bout?” He asked impatiently. “I don’ know
nothin’ ’bout any chickens.... Ole crazy Lizzie ain’ thinkin’ ’bout
bringin’ no chickens to Gussie wake, is she?... An’ you ain’ wan’ play
fool an’ uphol’ ’uh in ’uh devilment?”

“Felo, for Gawd sake set down, an’ don’ talk so hasty,” Lethe told him
with annoyance. “Lizzie comin’ hyuh to bring de chickens she wan’ me keep
for ’uh till she come back from sugar-grindin’, yonder whah she goin’ to
Lafoosh plantation.”

“W’en she goin’?” Felo asked, sitting down beside Lethe on the step.

“Dey got a whole crowd o’ wimmins goin’ in de mawnin’; an’ I spec’
Lizzie goin’ ’long wid’ um’ on de Morgan train.”

“An’ she had to wait till dis late in de night to go ketch chickens an’
fetch ’um hyuh to bother you wid ’um?... W’at make ole lazy Chester
couldn’ brought ’um hyuh in de day-time?”

“Chester gone away,” Lethe informed him.

“Who? Chester gone sugar-grindin’!” Felo exclaimed, laughing with great
amusement. “Lizzie Cole better hurry an’ go yonder an’ look after
Chester, befo’ some dem green country niggers sasharate de po’ boy body
an’ soul, w’en he workin’ munks de mens, cuttin’ sugar cane in de big
open fiel’.”

“W’at make you all time wan’ be so scoffish?” Lethe asked him. “Chester
ain’ big enough to take care himself?... Chester ain’ simple.... An’ you
ain’ need to worry ’bout Chester. ’Cause Chester ain’ gone to no country
to cut no sugar cane.... Whah Chester gone ain’ nobody business. So try’n
keep still, an’ don’ be talkin’ all ove’ yo’ mouth till you know somh’n
’bout people mo’ better’n guessin’ an’ supposin’.”

“But no!” Felo faltered; surprised at her unexpected defensive attitude.
“Since w’en you done come to be mixed up in Chester business so, you
gotta set to me like dis?”

“Felo, is you a plumb fool all by yo’-self?” Lethe asked him quietly.
“W’at I wan’ do, havin’ any traffic wid chillun like Chester?... You ain’
got to come hyuh an’ ’cuse me, suspicious like dat....”

“Chillun, man, or boy; or w’atsome-ever you wan’ call it,” he interrupted
sullenly. “But look like y’all two mus’ be got some kind o’ secut
un’stannin’ wid each-another; w’en you so quick to take up de queshtun,
an’ ack like you know somh’n you don’ wan’ tell ’bout.... But da’s
alright,” he went on, with an aggrieved air. “You ain’ compel to lemme
know w’at goin’ on.... W’en you got Chester right hyuh so conveenyun all
de time; an’ I’m way yonder ’cross de river, countin’ on evvything bein’
straight, an’ trus’in all things is fair an’ square.... You ain’ compel
to tell me nothin’, if da’s de way yo’ mind lead you....”

“Felo, for Gawd sake, shet yo’ mouth an’ keep still,” Lethe told him;
getting up from the steps and starting to go into the house. “Hyuh come
Lizzie, now.... So come in-doors, if you wan’ find out ’bout Chester....
Leave Lizzie tell you ’bout him. She ain’ goin’ hol’ nothin’ back from
you.... Hyuh she is, now. Go ’head inside; an’ don’ look so hateful.”

Lizzie arrived with a great bunch of squawking chickens in each hand.
Seeing the gate closed, and unable to help herself, she called out
boisterously:

“Whah y’all done lef’ yo’ manners, you can’t come hyuh an’ open dis gate
an’ lemme in? You wan’ leave me stay out hyuh all night helpless? Wid all
dis mighty roocus dese crazy chickens raisin’ right hyuh in front Lethe
door?... Come open dis gate, for Gawd sake. Befo’ some dese inquiztun
w’ite folks run up hyuh an’ try to ’res’ Lizzie for robbin’ people
hen-roos’ after hours like dis is.... Stop yo’ grinnin’, an’ come hyuh
an’ gimme a han’,” she commanded.

Felo hurried to open the gate and let her in, and Lethe led the way to
the back yard; both of them laughing heartily at Lizzie’s amusing speech
and the antics she performed as she deposited the squawking chickens on
the ground. Felo helped her untie the strings from their feet, and after
they were put away for the night and Lethe saw that the chicken house
door was made fast, the party went into the kitchen and sat down to talk.

After scanning the room inquisitively, Lizzie got up and helped herself
to a dipper of water from the bucket standing on the table; then kicked
off her shoes and made herself ready to enjoy any form of entertainment
the night would offer. Seeing that she was in a loquacious humor, Lethe
encouraged her to talk of Chester; knowing how curious Felo was to learn
something of his whereabouts. At the mention of his name, Felo asked if
Chester was going to the wake.

“No,” Lizzie answered quietly; then added with a grandiloquent air, that
Mr. Frackshun was trav’lin’.

“To Lafourche?” Felo inquired.

“No. To furren parts,” Lizzie told him, enigmatically.

“To the sugar-grindin’?” Felo persisted.

No. Mr. Frackshun didn’t care nothin’ ’bout playin’ in a cane field;
Lizzie informed him facetiously. Mr. Frackshun said he found cuttin’ cane
too bitterly against the constitution.... ’Tain’ everybody kin stand it
like wimmins bin use to it.... An’ innyway, Mr. Frackshun said he was
afraid of his feets gittin’ fros’-bitten, cold mawnin’s like they had
in the country.... And a cane-knife was such a dang’us-lookin’ weepon,
Mr. Frackshun said he couldn’t see how he was goin’ to git use to totin’
one....

What was Lizzie tryin’ to make out of Chester? Felo asked her
reprovingly. Since when did Chester come to be so high-up and particular
that he could pick and choose the kind of work he wanted to do, when
niggers in Gritny was glad to do any kind of work that come to their
hand, tight as money was this time of the year?... Was she satisfied to
listen to Chester’s crazy talk, and leave him stay home playin’ weak and
timmasun, layin’ up on her all winter long doin’ nothin’? While she was
scufflin’ yonder in the frosty cane-field, workin’ her poor fool-self to
death till way after Christmas, when the grindin’ was over?... Lizzie
must think Chester was some kind of jew’lry had to be locked up in the
house to keep people from runnin’ off with....

“But you know de ole house so rickety an’ lavadated, Mr. Felo, da’s
de very reason I sont Chester ’way from hyuh,” Lizzie told him with
impressive seriousness. “My li’l ole shanty ain’ no safe place to hide
nothin’ w’en dese Gritny w’ite folks commences plund’in an’ searchin’....
An’ jus’ like you say,—Chester so simple an’ timmasun,—Lizzie ain’ feel
like she wan’ take no chances.... So da’s how come she make de jew’lry
take a depahter.” (Departure.)

“Lawd! Lizzie, you sho is a circus,” exclaimed Lethe, laughing heartily.

Felo looked puzzled and annoyed, and scowled at Lethe, wondering at her
amusement. What did Lizzie mean? He asked her impatiently. Did she think
he came there to waste time and listen to a whole lot of riddles and
humbug?... He wasn’t no chillun.... If she wanted to talk, why didn’t
she talk plain and natchal; and not try to talk a mouth full of mystery
nobody wasn’t able to ’lucidate....

“Dey ain’ got no myst’ry ’bout Chester goin’ ’way from hyuh, Mr. Felo,”
Lizzie explained quietly. “I _sont_ de boy ’way from hyuh; an’ I know de
place whah he gone to. An’ dey ain’ nobody else but Lizzie Cole to be
helt ’sponsible for de boy welfare, w’en de time come for givin’ ’count
on Chester Frackshun disa’pyunce out o’ Gritny.... So sen’ ’um to me,
w’en dey wan’ ax queshtun an’ find out somh’n.... I ain’t ’fraid to face
’um.”

“Who dat you got to face ’bout Chester goin’ away?” Felo asked quickly.

“All dem parties an’ parties settin’ up in de cou’t-house, try’n to play
smart,” Lizzie answered.

“W’at thing dis Chester done commit, you gotta worry ’bout people in de
cou’t-house callin’ on you?” Felo asked with eager surprise.

“’Tain’ nothin’ Chester did,—’zac’ly speakin’,” Lizzie went on to
explain. It was the things the white folks might come to do if they
heard that Chester was under suspicion.... Because he had already runned
up on danger two times: with all these niggers blabbin’ about the way
ole Unc’ Peesah died. And about the needle Tempe got from Chester the
night before the old man passed out. Then come Unc’ Nat, spreadin’ the
news that Chester was the one that left the well open at the corner the
night Tempe got drownded, makin’ it look like the boy wanted to get her
out of the way to stop any more talk about the fatal needle.... Who? No
indeed.... She wasn’t goin’ to leave a poor simple motherless boy like
Chester stay home alone when she went to the sugar-grindin’, so the white
folks could come and land him up in jail; when he was just natchally
innocent and helpless.... ’Specially when that man lookin’ after the
light on the Morgan road, had come to her the mawnin’ after Gussie was
runned over; inquirin’ what time it was when Chester come home the night
before; and if he seen the switch light burnin’ when he went ’cross the
Green.... Tryin’ to make it look like Chester had somh’n to do with bein’
mixed-up in how Gussie come to be runned over by a switch engine....

“Lawd, Lizzie! Go ’way from hyuh,” Lethe exclaimed aghast. “You ain’
never tol’ me dat befo’.”

“W’at you said to de man?” Felo asked, greatly concerned.

“I say: Who you mean, Chester Frackshun?... I say: Dis de place he live;
but he ain’ bin home hyuh for over a week.... I say: Chester yonder
’cross de lake, workin’ in a saw mill on Blind River. An’ I know he ain’
seen no kind o’ switch light yonder in dat swampy lonesome country.”

“An’ Chester was already gone away?” Felo wanted to know.

“Who?” Lizzie laughed, pleased with the remembrance of her little
stratagem. Chester was right there in the kitchen, down on his knees,
she went on to relate; close enough for the man to hear the sound of the
scrubbin’-brush swishin’ up an’ down the kitchen flo’, right behind where
she was standin’ in the door-way.

“But soon as de man shet de gate an’ went away, I say: Chester, put dat
scrubbin’-brush an’ bucket out yo’ han’s, an’ git up from hyuh an’ pack
yo’ clo’se quick as you kin git ’um together.... You gotta go ’way from
hyuh tonight,—an’ not a _word_ from you.... Hyuh come another death done
layed at you do’. So you ain’ got a thing to do, but hurry ’way from dis
place, an’ stay ’way from hyuh till all dis commotion pass over an’ times
come to be natchal again.... ’Cause you know, I’m goin’ yonder to Lafoosh
to de grindin’; an’ you ain’ got strank enough to fight all dese Gritny
w’ite folks w’en dey commence pickin’ on you, an’ Lizzie ain’ hyuh to
puhteck you.... So git together all yo’ few l’il scat’rin rags; ’cause I
wan’ see you leave dis house tonight, soon’s it git dark....”

“An’ you made ’im go ’way?” Felo interrupted.

“Who? Chester ain’ no fool,” she answered. “Chester know too good,
how he gotta listen w’en Lizzie lay down de law an’ preach ’im somh’n
cuncernin’ of ’is welfare.... Yas indeed, he went away,” she continued.
“Went away wid ’is li’l bundle und’ ’is arm, quick as I could git yonder
to de boat landin’ on de Basin, an’ make ’rangements wid de man on de
charcoal lugger to take Chester ’long wid ’im to do de cookin’ on de trip
over.”

“So da’s w’at Chester goin’ do now? Go back to cookin’ on de charcoal
luggers for de winter?” Felo inquired.

“I ain’ told you Chester was goin’ stay on no charcoal lugger all
winter,” Lizzie informed him sharply.

“Den whah Chester gone?” Felo demanded.

“To furren parts,” Lizzie replied with tantalizing artfulness.

Felo looked at her with a scowl of displeasure, feeling that she meant to
withhold something important from him. What made her act so tight-mouth,
and try to keep things so secret? He asked with impatience. Did she have
to hide things like that from close friends like him and Lethe?... Didn’t
she know that both of them would be ready to stand by Chester if he got
into any trouble with the white folks?... What ailed her, anyway?

Mr. Felo had to excuse her, Lizzie informed him politely; but she just
natchally couldn’t trust no ’ceitful niggers, any more than she could
trust some of the white folks.... ’Specially white folks like some of
them shoo-fly offsprings they had sittin’ up in the court house....

“But who is you, in de name o’ Gawd?” Lethe asked in a surprised voice,
looking at her quietly and speaking very slowly. “Settin’ hyuh talkin’
’bout niggers bein’ ’ceitful,—wid all dis mighty ’thawity to criticize
yo’ own color?... _You_ ain’ ’ceitful, is you?... Scandalizin’ w’ite
folks you done growed up wid; w’en you oughta be proud to give ’um
respec’ for all de ’sistance you got from ’um in de needed time.... Gawd
knows, Lizzie, you sho oughta be shame to make little o’ yo’ Gritny
people like dat.”

“Leave Lizzie ’lone, an’ quit talkin’, Lethe; an’ le’s go yonder to
Gussie wake whah things is peaceful,” Felo suggested with sudden
abruptness. “Lizzie ain’ bin use to nothin’, no-how; an’ da’s w’at make
her so scawnful ’bout de w’ite folks. She jus’ like de res’ o’ dese po’
ignun niggers, ain’ got no inher’tunce.”

What kind of inheritance did some of the white folks sittin’ up in the
court house have? Lizzie wanted to know. Did Mr. Felo ever take notice
how many of the people holdin’ high office in the court house, ain’t been
connected with nothin’ but cows, one generation to another?... Who?...
She could look back long as she knowed, and could tell about the time
when their gramma and grampa went grassin’ ’long-side the railroad track
with a wheel-barrow.... And the many times she seen their parents pushin’
cows to the pasture back and forth.... And right now, she could call
the name of _plenty_ of them drawin’ pay from the court house, what was
makin’ extra change, sellin’ cream cheese and buttermilk from the cows
they had in their yard.... And was that kind o’ practice-habit the thing
Mr. Felo wanted to call inheritance?... Who? She asked him, laughing with
great amusement.... A grass sickle, cows, and some cream cheese moulds
wasn’t nothin’ she could see to make people set up and put on airs like
folks what comed from a family of ’ridginy people....

“But w’at all dis hist’ry got to do wid Chester goin’ away from Gritny?”
Felo asked with eager curiosity.

It had plenty to do with it; Lizzie assured him. She was sharp enough to
know what would happen if people kept on talkin’ about Chester and Tempe
and the needle and the fatal switch engine; tryin’ to make him answer for
somethin’ when he wasn’t guilty.... No indeed. She wasn’t goin’ to take
no fool chances with court-house people she knowed so good.... White
folks what always bin used to somh’n, never was hard on niggers; even way
back in Reb’-time days. And anybody ever bin had any traffic with them
could tell you the same thing.... And Mr. Felo could ask his Ma Fanny,
and find out for himself she wasn’t tellin’ no lie. ’Cause all the people
along the coast knowed the hist’ry about the Derbignys and the Garderes
and the De Gruy family, and some them yuther plantation people what
always had somh’n; and how they was good to their cullud folks.... Even
today....

“But who wan’ put inny pennunce in shoo-fly people an’ off-springs?” She
asked indignantly. “No indeed, Lawd! Not Lizzie Cole.... No matter if
her father is a preacher o’ de gospel, an’ tries to make her b’lieve she
gotta love her neighbor like she love herself.... Who? Mr. Felo think she
goin’ study ’bout givin’ people love an’ trus’, w’en she look back an’
ain’ see nothin’ behin’ ’um but a ginneration o’ cattle an’ cows?” ...

“An’ you ain’ goin’ leave none yo’ own color know whah Chester gone to?”
Felo asked.

No. Lizzie answered positively. She had passed her hand ’cross her mouth,
and wasn’t goin’ to say nothin’ to _nobody_ till she came back from the
grindin’ after Christmas, with a pocket full of money.... Then she would
bring Chester back to the castle yonder ’cross the pasture, and spread
joy for all the hongry niggers in the East Green.... But now that she had
the boy out of danger, she was goin’ to Lafoosh to have a good time, with
Scilla and Nookie and Carmelite and Pinkey, and all the other wimmins
that said they were goin’.... Soongy said she was countin’ on goin’, if
she could fix it so Dink could stay at Aunt Fisky’s house till she come
back.... Now that Gussie was gone, Dink would be a good help to Aunt
Fisky; runnin’ to the groc’ry and washin’ dishes and ’tendin’ to her
ducks and things. ’Cause Soongy cert’ny had raised Dink handy and nice.

“But none y’all ain’ goin’ to Gussie funeyul tomorrow?” Lethe asked her
dubiously.

“Who?” Lizzie exclaimed, greatly surprised at the question. “You ain’
think Lizzie goin’ run to de country careless, an’ leave a fine brass
ban’ behind her, like dey say dey goin’ have tootin’ music in front o’
Gussie, is you?... No indeed.... Lizzie too crazy ’bout music to go ’way
from hyuh till after dey done put Gussie away an’ all de purrade over.
Den she kin git on de train wid happy membunce o’ Gussie, an’ go to de
grindin’ well pleased.”

If the band of music was the only thing leadin’ Lizzie to stay over to
go to the funeral, she ought to be more decent and not tell it; Felo
reprimanded, batting his eyelids crossly. If she didn’t want to give
any respect to Gussie, she ought to stay at home, and not play hypocrite
so brazen before a whole crowd of people, right in front of Aunt Fisky’s
face.

She never did care nothin’ for ole no-nation Gussie; Lizzie told him
frankly. And she didn’t have respect to study about. But a brass band
was a diffunt queshtun.... _Goin’_ to the funeral wasn’t the main part
she had to consider. It was comin’ back, dancin’ to the music, all the
way from the graveyard to the Gritny ferry-boat.... Who?... That was
enough to make her don’t care if she missed forty Morgan trains goin’ to
the grindin’.... Everybody knowed how all them Gritny niggers would come
skippin’ and prancin’ up Main Street, when they heard that brass band
commence soundin’ them teasin’ blues.... And if they just started playin’
“O Didn’t He Ramble,”—she cert’ny knowed there wasn’t _nothin’_ goin’ to
keep her from shakin’ her fool-self to a fraz’lin finish....

“Lethe!” Felo exclaimed, exasperated; rolling his eyes ominously. “You
sit hyuh quiet, an’ listen at dis Hell-bound ooman talk like dat, an’
ain’ say nothin’ to ’uh?... Git up from hyuh an’ come on, if you goin’
wid me to Gussie wake tonight. An’ leave Lizzie hyuh to do like de devil
lead ’uh to do.... ’Cause I done los’ all patience wid ’uh. An’ I know
Gawd ain’ goin’ bother wid ’uh.... So come on!”

“You goin’ to de wake?” Lethe asked her, getting up and reaching for her
shawl, hanging on a nail behind the door.

“No,” Lizzie answered, smiling placidly. “You go ’head an’ take yo’
pleasure wid Mr. Felo, yonder munks de Chrishtuns. I’m goin’ stay hyuh
for a li’l w’ile an’ make me some weak coffee, if you don’ mind.... But
I’ll sho meet you tomorrow, dancin’ in de road, comin’ back; befo’ I take
de train in de evenin’ for Lafoosh plantation.”

Lethe told her to make herself at home, and started for the front door
with Felo following her, his eyes fixed on Lizzie with a glowering look.

“Good night, Mr. Felo,” she called to him in a derisive tone. “An’ I hope
Gawd take care o’ yo’ th’oat w’en you singin’ over Gussie so bol’ an’
manful, yonder munks de Chrishtuns.”




On reaching home in the evening, Mr. Amos was somewhat surprised to find
all the windows and doors open and lights burning in all the rooms,
seeming to anticipate the arrival of some friendly guest. The table was
set for one person, and the pots on the kitchen stove gave evidence that
everything was ready for the evening meal; but Felo was not in sight.
Going to the kitchen door, Mr. Amos found him in the back yard, quietly
hoeing his little hill of snap-beans, growing along the side fence; so
intent upon his gardening that he was not aware of being watched until
Mr. Amos spoke; inquiring what all the illuminations meant, and if he
were expecting anybody.

“Nobody but you,” Felo told him placidly. “Lessen somebody comin’ hyuh
unbeknownce.”

“Then, why all the lights?” Mr. Amos faltered.

“Man, go inside an’ set to de table; an’ don’ be so hard to please,”
Felo went on. “W’at dey is wrong, you can’ come home now an’ den, an’
fin’ de house lookin’ like things givin’ you welcome, aft’ a hard day
struggle?... If dis yo’ resident, an’ de place whah you look to find
yo’ peace an’ comfut; I ain’ see how you gotta think ’bout makin’ a
whole lot o’ extra show for out-side people, an’ don’ wan’ make none for
yo’-own self.... ’Specially w’en you cunsider you ain’ got so long to
enjoy yo’ life; an’ dey ain’ nobody to ’preshate de place no better’n you
an’ me.... Go set down, for Gawd sake. An’ don’ try to make me feel any
wusser’n I feel already.... Disappointed like I bin today wid people I
sho thought I could count on....”

What could have happened to bring on a mood like this? Mr. Amos wondered.
Did anything go wrong at the wake or the funeral? “I thought you would
come home bubbling over with news, and couldn’t wait to tell what you
saw,” he said to Felo, as he came in from the yard and began making ready
to serve dinner.

He didn’t feel like talkin’, Felo answered. He had to look after them
snap-beans, and twist them around the cane-reed poles he brought from
home; before the wind broke all the runners and fixed them so they
wouldn’t make no beans; after all the bother he had with them, waterin’
and ’tendin’ them like he did every evenin’....

“So set down an’ eat, an’ don’ plague me,” he said, appealingly.
“Evvything hyuh on de table for you. An’ if you want somh’n, I’ll be
right hyuh in de yard, an’ you kin call me.... Da’s alright?” He asked
hesitatingly.

“Go on,” Mr. Amos told him with an amused smile. “Maybe the fresh air
will revive you; and later on you’ll be more sociable.”

He didn’t need no fresh air to revive his feelin’s; Felo argued with
himself as he worked with his beans. Wasn’t he out in the fresh air
nearly all day? But that didn’t keep him from gittin’ down-casted. Even
with music playin’, and the Peefus members marchin’ back and forth around
Gussie’s tomb, callin’ out to the devil and beatin’ him off with their
battle axes. And with the people singin’ and talkin’ and goin’ on like
they did.... Excitement ain’t had nothin’ to do with his feelin’s bein’
upset. It was what people did to him that made him feel troubled in
his mind.... Just like Mr. Amos thinkin’ he wasn’t sociable. Somebody
onsociable was ’most as bad as somebody what wasn’t no Chrishtun.... He
went on ruminating.

What make Mr. Amos think he ain’t sociable, after he done come back from
Gritny plumb disgusted with evvything; glad to git home where he could
look over his mind peaceful, when he was doin’ his cookin’ and tryin’
to make things look nice and invitin’ to please nobody but him.... That
wasn’t no way to talk to an ole-time fellow-servant, just because he
ain’t ready to stretch his eyes and grin the minute somebody look at
him.... It sho was disencouragin’.... Couldn’t Mr. Amos keep patience,
and wait till he got through twistin’ them snap-beans? And finished up
evvything in the kitchen, so he could talk to him free and light-minded,
after both of them went upstairs?

It sho was strange, for people what was raised together, and played with
each-another from the days of their younger youth, not to be able to
’zern anybody condition when they seen them lookin’ like somh’n heavy was
layin’ on their mind....

“De man ain’ know me yet; an’ hyuh I bin servin’ ’im thoo evvy kind o’
close quarters all dese many years? Lawd, Lawd! Hyuh somh’n else done
comed up povokin’,” he went on cogitating aloud; hurrying through his
work to get upstairs, where he knew he would find Mr. Amos in his room,
lying down, reading.

Hearing Felo’s habitual goat-like sniff with which he playfully announced
his arrival, Mr. Amos turned and saw him leaning against the door frame,
waiting to be invited to have a seat. Knowing Felo’s propensity for all
kinds of “good stimalashun,” and wanting to see him in a pleasant frame
of mind, Mr. Amos gave him the keys of the armoire, and told him to get
the bottle of Scotch whiskey he would find on the shelf, and help himself
to a comforting drink.

Felo brought the bottle and two glasses and put them on the washstand,
and sat down, looking at the bottle without speaking.

“Don’t you want a drink?” Mr. Amos asked in surprise. “Lord knows you
look like you need one.”

“How long you bin had dis bottle o’ w’iskey?” Felo asked with quiet
artfulness.

“About two weeks.”

... “Is you know de bottle open, an’ some de licker gone from out it?”
Felo asked, with a knowing side glance at Mr. Amos.

“Yes. I opened it,” he told him. “What about it?”

“So da’s de way you does now,—drinks yo’ licker _secut_!” Felo accused
him playfully. “You sho is a nasty ’ceitful w’ite man,” he went on,
resuming something of his natural humor. “Done got you a nice full bottle
o’ w’iskey settin’ up in yo’ cubbud, locked up; an’ ain’ say a word to
nobody,—an’ me right hyuh in de same house wid you; an’ comes up hyuh to
yo’ room on de sly, an’ drinks to yo’ ease; an’ den got de cheek to tell
me ’bout bein’ onsociable!... Man, you oughta go ’way from hyuh.”

Mr. Amos put his book aside and laughed with hearty enjoyment at the
playful reprimand. He knew by the familiar attitude that Felo was himself
again. It was not the familiarity of disrespect or impudence; but a
wholesome, child-like familiarity born of simple trust and friendly
understanding; a delightful freedom of manner and speech never indulged
in before any unsympathetic outsider, but reserved for the exclusive
entertainment of his “ole-time buzzum friend,” whom he knew would never
misinterpret the intention.

“Then you don’t want a drink, I suppose? Since you feel that you’ve been
slighted,” Mr. Amos said to him.

“Who?” Felo answered, reaching for the bottle and taking out the cork
with a flourish. “Don’t you know I bin too well-raise to refuse?
’Specially good licker like dis bottle look to be?... An’ I’m goin’ fill
up dis glass my own-self, too,” he went on muttering softly. “’Cause you
jus’ natchally tetches a bottle too light w’en you eechin’ out licker to
people. An’ you know I don’ b’lieve in bein’ skimson ’bout no kind o’
stimalashun.”

Having filled the glasses, he gave one to Mr. Amos, then lifting his own
and sniffing with energy, he said:

“Peace an’ happiness to yo’ heart, an’ Gawd keep de castle well-puhvided.”

“That’s a very nice long-sighted wish,” Mr. Amos told him, smiling.
“Here’s to your good health, and a whole lot of excitement when you go
home Sunday.”

“Look! Leave dat be right whah it is,” Felo answered abruptly. He didn’t
want to hear tell nothin’ about any Sunday.... Who wanted to talk
about lookin’ for any excitement, when everybody was gone away to the
sugar-grindin’, and nobody he cared about was left in Gritny to stir up
somh’n anyways interestin’?... He didn’t have nothin’ particular to go
home for Sunday. Ma Fanny could get some of Liza’s lazy chillun to worry
over totin’ slop for that hog.... And anyway, he was disgusted with
totin’ slop like he did every Gawd-blessed Sunday of the world; and ain’t
got nothin’ for it except people criticizin’.... They didn’t have nobody
he cared to see in Gritny. He was goin’ to stay home and go to church in
the evenin’, yonder to Holly Grove, ’cross the New Basin.... Wondering at
this sudden disinterest in things at home, Mr. Amos suggested that Lethe
might be pleased to see him on Sunday.

Who? Felo answered with a tone of evident disappointment. Lethe
wasn’t no diffunt from the rest of them crazy wimmins bin raised on a
plantation.... You can take a nigger out the country, but you sho Gawd
can’t take the country out a nigger.... He went on with vehemence.
Lethe wasn’t satisfied with havin’ a good place to work at Miss Tillie
house; comin’ home soon every evenin’, with half a day off on Sunday,
when the two of them could be together nice and friendly; there she had
to leave ole wild Lizzie Cole put devilment in her head and make her
onrestful,—goin’ yonder to the sugar-grindin’ like all them other cheap
Gritny niggers what think more about money than they do about manners and
behavior....

“An’ ain’ tol’ me a word ’bout w’at she was inten’ to do, till de las’
minute,” he went on.

Now that the cheering drink had loosened his tongue, Mr. Amos knew
that he would continue to talk freely, and it was wise to offer no
interruption. Of course, goin’ to Gussie’s funeral with Lizzie Cole for
her partner couldn’t be helped; Felo went on to relate. Because all the
wimmins had to keep separate from the mens and march to they-self; so
Lethe was _compelled_ to walk ’long-side of Lizzie, when Lizzie just
natchally forced herself on her.... But how Lethe ain’ come to change
her mind and break away from Lizzie comin’ back, was somh’n he couldn’t
understand, no matter how hard he thought on it.... Stickin’ close to
Lizzie like she did, and the two of them comin’ up the big road, dancin’
and shakin’ their reckless bodies to the ratty music the band was
playin’; the same as if they were yonder on the flatform to Mr. Snider
honky-tonk, back of Gritny.... “And mad like I was, there I couldn’t say
a thing to her; ’count o’ bein’ in de purrude wid de Peefus uniform on,
an’ all de ’couterments in my hand an’ ’cross my shoulder....”

“And did you get to see her after the funeral was over?” Mr. Amos
encouraged him.

“Who?... Maybe you ain’ think I didn’t set to her strong w’en I got back
to her house, aft’ I left de crowd at de ferry-landin’,” Felo boasted.

What he said to her sho was goin’ to hold her for a long time; the way he
sasharated her feelin’s for leavin’ ole strumpet Lizzie lead her astray,
and makin’ her expose herself before all Gritny like she did.... No
indeed. He didn’t bit his tongue; when he knowed that the sperret o’ Gawd
had called on him to chastise Lethe, and make her re’lize what was her
fittin’ tahminashun....

“And did Lethe stand for all your severity and offer no resistance, or
try to make an explanation of any kind?” Mr. Amos asked him.

“Da’s de very subjec’ I’m comin’ to now,” Felo continued. “She look like
she ain’ _care_ to answer back; jus keepin’ still, an’ goin’ roun’ de
room, straight’nin’ up, an’ fixin’ some her clo’se w’at was piled up on
de bed.

“I say to myself: Da’s a good sign. She ain’ try’n to start no wrangle,
like she always do. She mus’ be thinkin’ ’bout w’at I say to her; an’ she
goin’ profit by it.

“So aft’ I had talk all I wan’ talk, an’ tol’ her I was goin’ count
on seein’ her nex’ Sunday; she come to de front gate wid me nice an’
frien’ly; an’ I lef’ her lookin’ like she was please’; an’ went roun’
to Ma Fanny house to see how things was gittin’ on, befo’ I start back
’cross de river.

“Evvything had come to look so encouragin’, I never would bin thought
’bout nothin’ diffunt; an’ my ’tenshun was leadin’ me to hurry up an’ git
hyuh to fix things for you quick as I could. But it mus’ bin de sperret
o’ Gawd met me on de road, an’ tol’ me to go by de Morgan station....

“W’en de nex’ thing I knowed: Hyuh was Lethe, wid a bundle o’ clo’se
un’ her arm; stannin’ in line at de railroad station, munks a mul’tude
o’ wimmins, waitin’ to git on de train goin’ yonder to Lafoosh
sugar-grindin’.... Wid Lizzie Cole right ’longside her, grinnin’ at me
like a fatal devil straight out o’ Hell.”

“And what did you do?” asked Mr. Amos, laughing with keen amusement at
the awkwardness of the situation and Felo’s naïve revealment of righteous
disappointment.

“W’at you expec’ me to do, w’en de train was jus’ ’bout to pull out from
de station?” He asked fretfully. “You ain’ think I’m goin’ jump on an’ go
’long wid her, is you?”

“And Lethe never told you anything about wanting to go to the grinding?”
Mr. Amos inquired.

“What Lethe wan’ go to any grindin’ for, w’en she makin’ good money
at Miss Tillie house? An’ got a nice place to live in, decen’ an’
high-minded? An’ got me to lend her ’sistance inny time she lookin’ for a
willin’ han’?” ... Felo argued with growing resentment. “Lethe ain’ never
had no grindin’ to study ’bout, till dat wil’ Hellian Lizzie come ’long
an’ got her worked up ove’ it.... An’ for nothin’ mo’ den to spite me,
an’ git me onsatafied; ’cause she knowed dat nex’ to my church, Lethe was
de secon’ big injoyment to make me count on comin’ over to Gritny evvy
Sunday.... But w’at I got to count on now? De way things done come to be
mixed up, an’ Lethe done gone away?”

There was a note of loneliness in his voice, and his face assumed an
expression of utter bereavement. Mr. Amos regarded him in silence, amused
by his quaint philosophy, at the same time conscious of a feeling of
genuine sympathy.

“To look at you now,” he said to him cheerfully, “anyone would think
that Lethe was dead and buried, and you didn’t have a friend left in the
world. Aren’t there some other worthwhile people in Gretna you can go to
see?... There, take your glass, and have a drink to a new pleasure next
Sunday.”

Felo looked at the bottle, trying to smile. He wasn’t worrin’ about
seein’ no Gritny people, he answered with polite indifference. Nearly
everybody what had any life in them, and counted for somh’n with the
colored folks, was gone to the country. And all the other ondecent mixtry
they had roamin’ around town, he didn’t care to have no traffic with....
But maybe he would look over his mind, and go to see Aunt Susan and
Tom. Because he got word that Susan was goin’ to give a molasses candy
pullin’, to raise a little money for ole Unc’ Foteen. So maybe he would
consider goin’ up the coast, and help out the best way he could....
Every little nickel did some good in the time of need. And the poor ole
man didn’t have so long to live, no-how.... And then he was sure Unc’
Nat would be there to give Susan a hand. You could always look to find
Unc’ Nat any place where they was passin’ around the plate, takin’ up
collection for somebody in trouble.... And any way, he wouldn’t mind
seein’ Unc’ Nat, Sunday. ’Cause Unc’ Nat was one what never fail to make
somebody laugh when they be feelin’ down-casted and onsatafied....

“Well then, fill your glass, and let us drink to a big jubilation at
Susan’s next Sunday,” Mr. Amos told him. “And then, go to bed and rest
yourself, and try to forget your disappointment. You know, we both need
plenty of sleep and rest if we expect to keep young and always look
beautiful.”

“Man, quit yo’ humbug, for Gawd sake,” Felo answered, with a broad smile,
as he filled a glass for Mr. Amos and handed it to him.

Then he poured a glass for himself and drank it down with a sounding
gulp, and looked at Mr. Amos, saying:

“Who ever tol’ you, you was beautiful?... You know good as I know, dat
Miss Ellen, either Ma Fanny, ain’ never rocked either one us on dey lap
no time, an’ say: Go to sleep my pretty baby.”



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 74941 ***
